"Wedlock suits you,"
"I think, Watson, that you have puton seven and a half pounds since I saw you."
"Seven!"
"Indeed, I should have thought a little more. Just a trifle more, Ifancy, Watson. And in practice again, I observe. You did not tell methat you intended to go into harness."
"Then, how do you know?"
"I see it, I deduce it. How do I know that you have been gettingyourself very wet lately, and that you have a most clumsy and carelessservant girl?"
"My dear Holmes,"
"this is too much. You would certainly havebeen burned, had you lived a few centuries ago. It is true that I had acountry walk on Thursday and came home in a dreadful mess, but as Ihave changed my clothes I can’t imagine how you deduce it. As to MaryJane, she is incorrigible, and my wife has given her notice, but there,again, I fail to see how you work it out."
"It is simplicity itself,"
"my eyes tell me that on the insideof your left shoe, just where the firelight strikes it, the leather isscored by six almost parallel cuts. Obviously they have been caused bysomeone who has very carelessly scraped round the edges of the sole inorder to remove crusted mud from it. Hence, you see, my doublededuction that you had been out in vile weather, and that you had aparticularly malignant boot-slitting specimen of the London slavey. Asto your practice, if a gentleman walks into my rooms smelling ofiodoform, with a black mark of nitrate of silver upon his rightforefinger, and a bulge on the right side of his top-hat to show wherehe has secreted his stethoscope, I must be dull, indeed, if I do notpronounce him to be an active member of the medical profession."
"When I hear you give your reasons,"
"the thing always appears to me to be so ridiculously simple that Icould easily do it myself, though at each successive instance of yourreasoning I am baffled until you explain your process. And yet Ibelieve that my eyes are as good as yours."
"Quite so,"
"You see, but you do not observe. Thedistinction is clear. For example, you have frequently seen the stepswhich lead up from the hall to this room."
"Frequently."
"How often?"
"Well, some hundreds of times."
"Then how many are there?"
"How many? I don’t know."
"Quite so! You have not observed. And yet you have seen. That is justmy point. Now, I know that there are seventeen steps, because I haveboth seen and observed. By the way, since you are interested in theselittle problems, and since you are good enough to chronicle one or twoof my trifling experiences, you may be interested in this."
"It came by the last post,"
"Read it aloud."
"There will call upon you to-night, at a quarter to eight o’clock,"
"a gentleman who desires to consult you upon a matter of the verydeepest moment. Your recent services to one of the royal houses ofEurope have shown that you are one who may safely be trusted withmatters which are of an importance which can hardly be exaggerated.This account of you we have from all quarters received. Be in yourchamber then at that hour, and do not take it amiss if your visitorwear a mask."
"This is indeed a mystery,"
"What do you imagine that itmeans?"
"I have no data yet. It is a capital mistake to theorise before one hasdata. Insensibly one begins to twist facts to suit theories, instead oftheories to suit facts. But the note itself. What do you deduce fromit?"
"The man who wrote it was presumably well to do,"
"Such paper could notbe bought under half a crown a packet. It is peculiarly strong andstiff."
"Peculiar—that is the very word,"
"It is not an Englishpaper at all. Hold it up to the light."
"E"
"g,"
"P,"
"G"
"t"
"What do you make of that?"
"The name of the maker, no doubt; or his monogram, rather."
"Not at all. The ‘G’ with the small ‘t’ stands for ‘Gesellschaft,’which is the German for ‘Company.’ It is a customary contraction likeour ‘Co.’ ‘P,’ of course, stands for ‘Papier.’ Now for the ‘Eg.’ Let usglance at our Continental Gazetteer."
"Eglow, Eglonitz—here we are, Egria. It is in aGerman-speaking country—in Bohemia, not far from Carlsbad. ‘Remarkableas being the scene of the death of Wallenstein, and for its numerousglass-factories and paper-mills.’ Ha, ha, my boy, what do you make ofthat?"
"The paper was made in Bohemia,"
"Precisely. And the man who wrote the note is a German. Do you note thepeculiar construction of the sentence—‘This account of you we have fromall quarters received.’ A Frenchman or Russian could not have writtenthat. It is the German who is so uncourteous to his verbs. It onlyremains, therefore, to discover what is wanted by this German whowrites upon Bohemian paper and prefers wearing a mask to showing hisface. And here he comes, if I am not mistaken, to resolve all ourdoubts."
"A pair, by the sound,"
"Yes,"
"A nice little brougham and a pair of beauties. A hundredand fifty guineas apiece. There’s money in this case, Watson, if thereis nothing else."
"I think that I had better go, Holmes."
"Not a bit, Doctor. Stay where you are. I am lost without my Boswell.And this promises to be interesting. It would be a pity to miss it."
"But your client—"
"Never mind him. I may want your help, and so may he. Here he comes.Sit down in that armchair, Doctor, and give us your best attention."
"Come in!"
"You had my note?"
"I told you that I would call."
"Pray take a seat,"
"This is my friend and colleague, Dr.Watson, who is occasionally good enough to help me in my cases. Whomhave I the honour to address?"
"You may address me as the Count Von Kramm, a Bohemian nobleman. Iunderstand that this gentleman, your friend, is a man of honour anddiscretion, whom I may trust with a matter of the most extremeimportance. If not, I should much prefer to communicate with youalone."
"It is both, or none,"
"You may say before thisgentleman anything which you may say to me."
"Then I must begin,"
"by binding you both to absolute secrecy for two years; at the end ofthat time the matter will be of no importance. At present it is not toomuch to say that it is of such weight it may have an influence uponEuropean history."
"I promise,"
"And I."
"You will excuse this mask,"
"The augustperson who employs me wishes his agent to be unknown to you, and I mayconfess at once that the title by which I have just called myself isnot exactly my own."
"I was aware of it,"
"The circumstances are of great delicacy, and every precaution has tobe taken to quench what might grow to be an immense scandal andseriously compromise one of the reigning families of Europe. To speakplainly, the matter implicates the great House of Ormstein, hereditarykings of Bohemia."
"I was also aware of that,"
"If your Majesty would condescend to state your case,"
"Ishould be better able to advise you."
"You are right,"
"I am the King. Why should I attempt to conceal it?"
"Why, indeed?"
"Your Majesty had not spoken before Iwas aware that I was addressing Wilhelm Gottsreich Sigismond vonOrmstein, Grand Duke of Cassel-Felstein, and hereditary King ofBohemia."
"But you can understand,"
"you canunderstand that I am not accustomed to doing such business in my ownperson. Yet the matter was so delicate that I could not confide it toan agent without putting myself in his power. I have come _incognito_from Prague for the purpose of consulting you."
"Then, pray consult,"
"The facts are briefly these: Some five years ago, during a lengthyvisit to Warsaw, I made the acquaintance of the well-known adventuress,Irene Adler. The name is no doubt familiar to you."
"Kindly look her up in my index, Doctor,"
"Let me see!"
"Hum! Born in New Jersey in the year 1858.Contralto—hum! La Scala, hum! Prima donna Imperial Opera of Warsaw—yes!Retired from operatic stage—ha! Living in London—quite so! YourMajesty, as I understand, became entangled with this young person,wrote her some compromising letters, and is now desirous of gettingthose letters back."
"Precisely so. But how—"
"Was there a secret marriage?"
"None."
"No legal papers or certificates?"
"None."
"Then I fail to follow your Majesty. If this young person shouldproduce her letters for blackmailing or other purposes, how is she toprove their authenticity?"
"There is the writing."
"Pooh, pooh! Forgery."
"My private note-paper."
"Stolen."
"My own seal."
"Imitated."
"My photograph."
"Bought."
"We were both in the photograph."
"Oh, dear! That is very bad! Your Majesty has indeed committed anindiscretion."
"I was mad—insane."
"You have compromised yourself seriously."
"I was only Crown Prince then. I was young. I am but thirty now."
"It must be recovered."
"We have tried and failed."
"Your Majesty must pay. It must be bought."
"She will not sell."
"Stolen, then."
"Five attempts have been made. Twice burglars in my pay ransacked herhouse. Once we diverted her luggage when she travelled. Twice she hasbeen waylaid. There has been no result."
"No sign of it?"
"Absolutely none."
"It is quite a pretty little problem,"
"But a very serious one to me,"
"Very, indeed. And what does she propose to do with the photograph?"
"To ruin me."
"But how?"
"I am about to be married."
"So I have heard."
"To Clotilde Lothman von Saxe-Meningen, second daughter of the King ofScandinavia. You may know the strict principles of her family. She isherself the very soul of delicacy. A shadow of a doubt as to my conductwould bring the matter to an end."
"And Irene Adler?"
"Threatens to send them the photograph. And she will do it. I know thatshe will do it. You do not know her, but she has a soul of steel. Shehas the face of the most beautiful of women, and the mind of the mostresolute of men. Rather than I should marry another woman, there are nolengths to which she would not go—none."
"You are sure that she has not sent it yet?"
"I am sure."
"And why?"
"Because she has said that she would send it on the day when thebetrothal was publicly proclaimed. That will be next Monday."
"Oh, then we have three days yet,"
"That isvery fortunate, as I have one or two matters of importance to look intojust at present. Your Majesty will, of course, stay in London for thepresent?"
"Certainly. You will find me at the Langham under the name of the CountVon Kramm."
"Then I shall drop you a line to let you know how we progress."
"Pray do so. I shall be all anxiety."
"Then, as to money?"
"You have _carte blanche_."
"Absolutely?"
"I tell you that I would give one of the provinces of my kingdom tohave that photograph."
"And for present expenses?"
"There are three hundred pounds in gold and seven hundred in notes,"
"And Mademoiselle’s address?"
"Is Briony Lodge, Serpentine Avenue, St. John’s Wood."
"One other question,"
"Was thephotograph a cabinet?"
"It was."
"Then, good-night, your Majesty, and I trust that we shall soon havesome good news for you. And good-night, Watson,"
"If you will begood enough to call to-morrow afternoon at three o’clock I should liketo chat this little matter over with you."
"Well, really!"
"What is it?"
"It’s quite too funny. I am sure you could never guess how I employedmy morning, or what I ended by doing."
"I can’t imagine. I suppose that you have been watching the habits, andperhaps the house, of Miss Irene Adler."
"I then lounged down the street and found, as I expected, that therewas a mews in a lane which runs down by one wall of the garden. I lentthe ostlers a hand in rubbing down their horses, and received inexchange twopence, a glass of half-and-half, two fills of shag tobacco,and as much information as I could desire about Miss Adler, to saynothing of half a dozen other people in the neighbourhood in whom I wasnot in the least interested, but whose biographies I was compelled tolisten to."
"And what of Irene Adler?"
"This Godfrey Norton was evidently an important factor in the matter.He was a lawyer. That sounded ominous. What was the relation betweenthem, and what the object of his repeated visits? Was she his client,his friend, or his mistress? If the former, she had probablytransferred the photograph to his keeping. If the latter, it was lesslikely. On the issue of this question depended whether I shouldcontinue my work at Briony Lodge, or turn my attention to thegentleman’s chambers in the Temple. It was a delicate point, and itwidened the field of my inquiry. I fear that I bore you with thesedetails, but I have to let you see my little difficulties, if you areto understand the situation."
"I am following you closely,"
"I was half-dragged up to the altar, and before I knew where I was Ifound myself mumbling responses which were whispered in my ear, andvouching for things of which I knew nothing, and generally assisting inthe secure tying up of Irene Adler, spinster, to Godfrey Norton,bachelor. It was all done in an instant, and there was the gentlemanthanking me on the one side and the lady on the other, while theclergyman beamed on me in front. It was the most preposterous positionin which I ever found myself in my life, and it was the thought of itthat started me laughing just now. It seems that there had been someinformality about their license, that the clergyman absolutely refusedto marry them without a witness of some sort, and that my luckyappearance saved the bridegroom from having to sally out into thestreets in search of a best man. The bride gave me a sovereign, and Imean to wear it on my watch chain in memory of the occasion."
"This is a very unexpected turn of affairs,"
"and what then?"
"Well, I found my plans very seriously menaced. It looked as if thepair might take an immediate departure, and so necessitate very promptand energetic measures on my part. At the church door, however, theyseparated, he driving back to the Temple, and she to her own house. ‘Ishall drive out in the park at five as usual,’ she said as she lefthim. I heard no more. They drove away in different directions, and Iwent off to make my own arrangements."
"Which are?"
"Some cold beef and a glass of beer,"
"Ihave been too busy to think of food, and I am likely to be busier stillthis evening. By the way, Doctor, I shall want your co-operation."
"I shall be delighted."
"You don’t mind breaking the law?"
"Not in the least."
"Nor running a chance of arrest?"
"Not in a good cause."
"Oh, the cause is excellent!"
"Then I am your man."
"I was sure that I might rely on you."
"But what is it you wish?"
"When Mrs. Turner has brought in the tray I will make it clear to you.Now,"
"I must discuss it while I eat, for I have notmuch time. It is nearly five now. In two hours we must be on the sceneof action. Miss Irene, or Madame, rather, returns from her drive atseven. We must be at Briony Lodge to meet her."
"And what then?"
"You must leave that to me. I have already arranged what is to occur.There is only one point on which I must insist. You must not interfere,come what may. You understand?"
"I am to be neutral?"
"To do nothing whatever. There will probably be some smallunpleasantness. Do not join in it. It will end in my being conveyedinto the house. Four or five minutes afterwards the sitting-room windowwill open. You are to station yourself close to that open window."
"Yes."
"You are to watch me, for I will be visible to you."
"Yes."
"And when I raise my hand—so—you will throw into the room what I giveyou to throw, and will, at the same time, raise the cry of fire. Youquite follow me?"
"Entirely."
"It is nothing very formidable,"
"It is an ordinary plumber’s smoke-rocket, fittedwith a cap at either end to make it self-lighting. Your task isconfined to that. When you raise your cry of fire, it will be taken upby quite a number of people. You may then walk to the end of thestreet, and I will rejoin you in ten minutes. I hope that I have mademyself clear?"
"I am to remain neutral, to get near the window, to watch you, and atthe signal to throw in this object, then to raise the cry of fire, andto wait you at the corner of the street."
"Precisely."
"Then you may entirely rely on me."
"That is excellent. I think, perhaps, it is almost time that I preparefor the new role I have to play."
"You see,"
"this marriage rather simplifies matters. The photograph becomesa double-edged weapon now. The chances are that she would be as averseto its being seen by Mr. Godfrey Norton, as our client is to its comingto the eyes of his princess. Now the question is, Where are we to findthe photograph?"
"Where, indeed?"
"It is most unlikely that she carries it about with her. It is cabinetsize. Too large for easy concealment about a woman’s dress. She knowsthat the King is capable of having her waylaid and searched. Twoattempts of the sort have already been made. We may take it, then, thatshe does not carry it about with her."
"Where, then?"
"Her banker or her lawyer. There is that double possibility. But I aminclined to think neither. Women are naturally secretive, and they liketo do their own secreting. Why should she hand it over to anyone else?She could trust her own guardianship, but she could not tell whatindirect or political influence might be brought to bear upon abusiness man. Besides, remember that she had resolved to use it withina few days. It must be where she can lay her hands upon it. It must bein her own house."
"But it has twice been burgled."
"Pshaw! They did not know how to look."
"But how will you look?"
"I will not look."
"What then?"
"I will get her to show me."
"But she will refuse."
"She will not be able to. But I hear the rumble of wheels. It is hercarriage. Now carry out my orders to the letter."
"Is the poor gentleman much hurt?"
"He is dead,"
"No, no, there’s life in him!"
"But he’ll be gonebefore you can get him to hospital."
"He’s a brave fellow,"
"They would have had the lady’spurse and watch if it hadn’t been for him. They were a gang, and arough one, too. Ah, he’s breathing now."
"He can’t lie in the street. May we bring him in, marm?"
"Surely. Bring him into the sitting-room. There is a comfortable sofa.This way, please!"
"Fire!"
"Fire!"
"You did it very nicely, Doctor,"
"Nothing could have beenbetter. It is all right."
"You have the photograph?"
"I know where it is."
"And how did you find out?"
"She showed me, as I told you she would."
"I am still in the dark."
"I do not wish to make a mystery,"
"The matter wasperfectly simple. You, of course, saw that everyone in the street wasan accomplice. They were all engaged for the evening."
"I guessed as much."
"Then, when the row broke out, I had a little moist red paint in thepalm of my hand. I rushed forward, fell down, clapped my hand to myface, and became a piteous spectacle. It is an old trick."
"That also I could fathom."
"Then they carried me in. She was bound to have me in. What else couldshe do? And into her sitting-room, which was the very room which Isuspected. It lay between that and her bedroom, and I was determined tosee which. They laid me on a couch, I motioned for air, they werecompelled to open the window, and you had your chance."
"How did that help you?"
"It was all-important. When a woman thinks that her house is on fire,her instinct is at once to rush to the thing which she values most. Itis a perfectly overpowering impulse, and I have more than once takenadvantage of it. In the case of the Darlington Substitution Scandal itwas of use to me, and also in the Arnsworth Castle business. A marriedwoman grabs at her baby; an unmarried one reaches for her jewel-box.Now it was clear to me that our lady of to-day had nothing in the housemore precious to her than what we are in quest of. She would rush tosecure it. The alarm of fire was admirably done. The smoke and shoutingwere enough to shake nerves of steel. She responded beautifully. Thephotograph is in a recess behind a sliding panel just above the rightbell-pull. She was there in an instant, and I caught a glimpse of it asshe half drew it out. When I cried out that it was a false alarm, shereplaced it, glanced at the rocket, rushed from the room, and I havenot seen her since. I rose, and, making my excuses, escaped from thehouse. I hesitated whether to attempt to secure the photograph at once;but the coachman had come in, and as he was watching me narrowly, itseemed safer to wait. A little over-precipitance may ruin all."
"And now?"
"Our quest is practically finished. I shall call with the Kingto-morrow, and with you, if you care to come with us. We will be showninto the sitting-room to wait for the lady, but it is probable thatwhen she comes she may find neither us nor the photograph. It might bea satisfaction to his Majesty to regain it with his own hands."
"And when will you call?"
"At eight in the morning. She will not be up, so that we shall have aclear field. Besides, we must be prompt, for this marriage may mean acomplete change in her life and habits. I must wire to the King withoutdelay."
"Good-night, Mister Sherlock Holmes."
"I’ve heard that voice before,"
"Now, I wonder who the deuce that could have been."
"You have really got it!"
"Not yet."
"But you have hopes?"
"I have hopes."
"Then, come. I am all impatience to be gone."
"We must have a cab."
"No, my brougham is waiting."
"Then that will simplify matters."
"Irene Adler is married,"
"Married! When?"
"Yesterday."
"But to whom?"
"To an English lawyer named Norton."
"But she could not love him."
"I am in hopes that she does."
"And why in hopes?"
"Because it would spare your Majesty all fear of future annoyance. Ifthe lady loves her husband, she does not love your Majesty. If she doesnot love your Majesty, there is no reason why she should interfere withyour Majesty’s plan."
"It is true. And yet—! Well! I wish she had been of my own station!What a queen she would have made!"
"Mr. Sherlock Holmes, I believe?"
"I am Mr. Holmes,"
"Indeed! My mistress told me that you were likely to call. She leftthis morning with her husband by the 5:15 train from Charing Cross forthe Continent."
"What!"
"Do you mean that she has left England?"
"Never to return."
"And the papers?"
"All is lost."
"We shall see."
"Sherlock Holmes, Esq. To be left till called for."
"IRENE NORTON, _née_ ADLER."
"What a woman—oh, what a woman!"
"Did I not tell you how quick and resoluteshe was? Would she not have made an admirable queen? Is it not a pitythat she was not on my level?"
"From what I have seen of the lady, she seems, indeed, to be on a verydifferent level to your Majesty,"
"I am sorry thatI have not been able to bring your Majesty’s business to a moresuccessful conclusion."
"On the contrary, my dear sir,"
"nothing could be moresuccessful. I know that her word is inviolate. The photograph is now assafe as if it were in the fire."
"I am glad to hear your Majesty say so."
"I am immensely indebted to you. Pray tell me in what way I can rewardyou. This ring—"
"Your Majesty has something which I should value even more highly,"
"You have but to name it."
"This photograph!"
"Irene’s photograph!"
"Certainly, if you wish it."
"I thank your Majesty. Then there is no more to be done in the matter.I have the honour to wish you a very good morning."
"You could not possibly have come at a better time, my dear Watson,"
"I was afraid that you were engaged."
"So I am. Very much so."
"Then I can wait in the next room."
"Not at all. This gentleman, Mr. Wilson, has been my partner and helperin many of my most successful cases, and I have no doubt that he willbe of the utmost use to me in yours also."
"Try the settee,"
"Iknow, my dear Watson, that you share my love of all that is bizarre andoutside the conventions and humdrum routine of everyday life. You haveshown your relish for it by the enthusiasm which has prompted you tochronicle, and, if you will excuse my saying so, somewhat to embellishso many of my own little adventures."
"Your cases have indeed been of the greatest interest to me,"
"You will remember that I remarked the other day, just before we wentinto the very simple problem presented by Miss Mary Sutherland, thatfor strange effects and extraordinary combinations we must go to lifeitself, which is always far more daring than any effort of theimagination."
"A proposition which I took the liberty of doubting."
"You did, Doctor, but none the less you must come round to my view, forotherwise I shall keep on piling fact upon fact on you until yourreason breaks down under them and acknowledges me to be right. Now, Mr.Jabez Wilson here has been good enough to call upon me this morning,and to begin a narrative which promises to be one of the most singularwhich I have listened to for some time. You have heard me remark thatthe strangest and most unique things are very often connected not withthe larger but with the smaller crimes, and occasionally, indeed, wherethere is room for doubt whether any positive crime has been committed.As far as I have heard, it is impossible for me to say whether thepresent case is an instance of crime or not, but the course of eventsis certainly among the most singular that I have ever listened to.Perhaps, Mr. Wilson, you would have the great kindness to recommenceyour narrative. I ask you not merely because my friend Dr. Watson hasnot heard the opening part but also because the peculiar nature of thestory makes me anxious to have every possible detail from your lips. Asa rule, when I have heard some slight indication of the course ofevents, I am able to guide myself by the thousands of other similarcases which occur to my memory. In the present instance I am forced toadmit that the facts are, to the best of my belief, unique."
"Beyond the obviousfacts that he has at some time done manual labour, that he takes snuff,that he is a Freemason, that he has been in China, and that he has donea considerable amount of writing lately, I can deduce nothing else."
"How, in the name of good-fortune, did you know all that, Mr. Holmes?"
"How did you know, for example, that I did manual labour.It’s as true as gospel, for I began as a ship’s carpenter."
"Your hands, my dear sir. Your right hand is quite a size larger thanyour left. You have worked with it, and the muscles are moredeveloped."
"Well, the snuff, then, and the Freemasonry?"
"I won’t insult your intelligence by telling you how I read that,especially as, rather against the strict rules of your order, you usean arc-and-compass breastpin."
"Ah, of course, I forgot that. But the writing?"
"What else can be indicated by that right cuff so very shiny for fiveinches, and the left one with the smooth patch near the elbow where yourest it upon the desk?"
"Well, but China?"
"The fish that you have tattooed immediately above your right wristcould only have been done in China. I have made a small study of tattoomarks and have even contributed to the literature of the subject. Thattrick of staining the fishes’ scales of a delicate pink is quitepeculiar to China. When, in addition, I see a Chinese coin hanging fromyour watch-chain, the matter becomes even more simple."
"Well, I never!"
"I thoughtat first that you had done something clever, but I see that there wasnothing in it after all."
"I begin to think, Watson,"
"that I make a mistake inexplaining. ‘_Omne ignotum pro magnifico_,’ you know, and my poorlittle reputation, such as it is, will suffer shipwreck if I am socandid. Can you not find the advertisement, Mr. Wilson?"
"Yes, I have got it now,"
"Here it is. This is what began it all. Youjust read it for yourself, sir."
"TO THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE: On account of the bequest of the lateEzekiah Hopkins, of Lebanon, Pennsylvania, U.S.A., there is now anothervacancy open which entitles a member of the League to a salary of £ 4 aweek for purely nominal services. All red-headed men who are sound inbody and mind and above the age of twenty-one years, are eligible.Apply in person on Monday, at eleven o’clock, to Duncan Ross, at theoffices of the League, 7 Pope’s Court, Fleet Street."
"What on earth does this mean?"
"It is a little off the beaten track, isn’t it?"
"And now, Mr. Wilson, off you go at scratch and tell us all aboutyourself, your household, and the effect which this advertisement hadupon your fortunes. You will first make a note, Doctor, of the paperand the date."
"It is _The Morning Chronicle_ of April 27, 1890. Just two months ago."
"Very good. Now, Mr. Wilson?"
"Well, it is just as I have been telling you, Mr. Sherlock Holmes,"
"I have a small pawnbroker’sbusiness at Coburg Square, near the City. It’s not a very large affair,and of late years it has not done more than just give me a living. Iused to be able to keep two assistants, but now I only keep one; and Iwould have a job to pay him but that he is willing to come for halfwages so as to learn the business."
"What is the name of this obliging youth?"
"His name is Vincent Spaulding, and he’s not such a youth, either. It’shard to say his age. I should not wish a smarter assistant, Mr. Holmes;and I know very well that he could better himself and earn twice what Iam able to give him. But, after all, if he is satisfied, why should Iput ideas in his head?"
"Why, indeed? You seem most fortunate in having an _employé_ who comesunder the full market price. It is not a common experience amongemployers in this age. I don’t know that your assistant is not asremarkable as your advertisement."
"Oh, he has his faults, too,"
"Never was such a fellowfor photography. Snapping away with a camera when he ought to beimproving his mind, and then diving down into the cellar like a rabbitinto its hole to develop his pictures. That is his main fault, but onthe whole he’s a good worker. There’s no vice in him."
"He is still with you, I presume?"
"I never hope to see such a sight as that again, Mr. Holmes. Fromnorth, south, east, and west every man who had a shade of red in hishair had tramped into the city to answer the advertisement. FleetStreet was choked with red-headed folk, and Pope’s Court looked like acoster’s orange barrow. I should not have thought there were so many inthe whole country as were brought together by that singleadvertisement. Every shade of colour they were—straw, lemon, orange,brick, Irish-setter, liver, clay; but, as Spaulding said, there werenot many who had the real vivid flame-coloured tint. When I saw howmany were waiting, I would have given it up in despair; but Spauldingwould not hear of it. How he did it I could not imagine, but he pushedand pulled and butted until he got me through the crowd, and right upto the steps which led to the office. There was a double stream uponthe stair, some going up in hope, and some coming back dejected; but wewedged in as well as we could and soon found ourselves in the office."
"Your experience has been a most entertaining one,"
"Pray continue your very interesting statement."
"Eight weeks passed away like this, and I had written about Abbots andArchery and Armour and Architecture and Attica, and hoped withdiligence that I might get on to the B’s before very long. It cost mesomething in foolscap, and I had pretty nearly filled a shelf with mywritings. And then suddenly the whole business came to an end."
"To an end?"
"Yes, sir. And no later than this morning. I went to my work as usualat ten o’clock, but the door was shut and locked, with a little squareof cardboard hammered on to the middle of the panel with a tack. Hereit is, and you can read for yourself."
"THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE IS DISSOLVED. October 9, 1890."
"I cannot see that there is anything very funny,"
"If you can do nothingbetter than laugh at me, I can go elsewhere."
"No, no,"
"I really wouldn’t miss your case for the world. It ismost refreshingly unusual. But there is, if you will excuse my sayingso, something just a little funny about it. Pray what steps did youtake when you found the card upon the door?"
"I started off, Mr. Holmes, but when I got to that address it was amanufactory of artificial knee-caps, and no one in it had ever heard ofeither Mr. William Morris or Mr. Duncan Ross."
"And what did you do then?"
"I went home to Saxe-Coburg Square, and I took the advice of myassistant. But he could not help me in any way. He could only say thatif I waited I should hear by post. But that was not quite good enough,Mr. Holmes. I did not wish to lose such a place without a struggle, so,as I had heard that you were good enough to give advice to poor folkwho were in need of it, I came right away to you."
"And you did very wisely,"
"Your case is an exceedinglyremarkable one, and I shall be happy to look into it. From what youhave told me I think that it is possible that graver issues hang fromit than might at first sight appear."
"Grave enough!"
"Why, I have lost four pound aweek."
"As far as you are personally concerned,"
"I do notsee that you have any grievance against this extraordinary league. Onthe contrary, you are, as I understand, richer by some £ 30, to saynothing of the minute knowledge which you have gained on every subjectwhich comes under the letter A. You have lost nothing by them."
"No, sir. But I want to find out about them, and who they are, and whattheir object was in playing this prank—if it was a prank—upon me. Itwas a pretty expensive joke for them, for it cost them two and thirtypounds."
"We shall endeavour to clear up these points for you. And, first, oneor two questions, Mr. Wilson. This assistant of yours who first calledyour attention to the advertisement—how long had he been with you?"
"About a month then."
"How did he come?"
"In answer to an advertisement."
"Was he the only applicant?"
"No, I had a dozen."
"Why did you pick him?"
"Because he was handy and would come cheap."
"At half wages, in fact."
"Yes."
"What is he like, this Vincent Spaulding?"
"Small, stout-built, very quick in his ways, no hair on his face,though he’s not short of thirty. Has a white splash of acid upon hisforehead."
"I thought asmuch,"
"Have you ever observed that his ears are pierced forearrings?"
"Yes, sir. He told me that a gipsy had done it for him when he was alad."
"Hum!"
"He is still withyou?"
"Oh, yes, sir; I have only just left him."
"And has your business been attended to in your absence?"
"Nothing to complain of, sir. There’s never very much to do of amorning."
"That will do, Mr. Wilson. I shall be happy to give you an opinion uponthe subject in the course of a day or two. To-day is Saturday, and Ihope that by Monday we may come to a conclusion."
"Well, Watson,"
"what do youmake of it all?"
"I make nothing of it,"
"It is a most mysteriousbusiness."
"As a rule,"
"the more bizarre a thing is the lessmysterious it proves to be. It is your commonplace, featureless crimeswhich are really puzzling, just as a commonplace face is the mostdifficult to identify. But I must be prompt over this matter."
"What are you going to do, then?"
"To smoke,"
"It is quite a three pipe problem, and I begthat you won’t speak to me for fifty minutes."
"Sarasate plays at the St. James’s Hall this afternoon,"
"What do you think, Watson? Could your patients spare you for a fewhours?"
"I have nothing to do to-day. My practice is never very absorbing."
"Then put on your hat and come. I am going through the City first, andwe can have some lunch on the way. I observe that there is a good dealof German music on the programme, which is rather more to my taste thanItalian or French. It is introspective, and I want to introspect. Comealong!"
"JABEZ WILSON"
"Thank you,"
"I only wished to ask you how you would gofrom here to the Strand."
"Third right, fourth left,"
"Smart fellow, that,"
"He is, in myjudgment, the fourth smartest man in London, and for daring I am notsure that he has not a claim to be third. I have known something of himbefore."
"Evidently,"
"Mr. Wilson’s assistant counts for a good deal inthis mystery of the Red-headed League. I am sure that you inquired yourway merely in order that you might see him."
"Not him."
"What then?"
"The knees of his trousers."
"And what did you see?"
"What I expected to see."
"Why did you beat the pavement?"
"My dear doctor, this is a time for observation, not for talk. We arespies in an enemy’s country. We know something of Saxe-Coburg Square.Let us now explore the parts which lie behind it."
"Let me see,"
"I should like just to remember the order of the houses here.It is a hobby of mine to have an exact knowledge of London. There isMortimer’s, the tobacconist, the little newspaper shop, the Coburgbranch of the City and Suburban Bank, the Vegetarian Restaurant, andMcFarlane’s carriage-building depot. That carries us right on to theother block. And now, Doctor, we’ve done our work, so it’s time we hadsome play. A sandwich and a cup of coffee, and then off to violin-land,where all is sweetness and delicacy and harmony, and there are nored-headed clients to vex us with their conundrums."
"You want to go home, no doubt, Doctor,"
"Yes, it would be as well."
"And I have some business to do which will take some hours. Thisbusiness at Coburg Square is serious."
"Why serious?"
"A considerable crime is in contemplation. I have every reason tobelieve that we shall be in time to stop it. But to-day being Saturdayrather complicates matters. I shall want your help to-night."
"At what time?"
"Ten will be early enough."
"I shall be at Baker Street at ten."
"Very well. And, I say, Doctor, there may be some little danger, sokindly put your army revolver in your pocket."
"Ha! Our party is complete,"
"Watson, I think youknow Mr. Jones, of Scotland Yard? Let me introduce you to Mr.Merryweather, who is to be our companion in to-night’s adventure."
"We’re hunting in couples again, Doctor, you see,"
"Our friend here is a wonderful man for starting achase. All he wants is an old dog to help him to do the running down."
"I hope a wild goose may not prove to be the end of our chase,"
"You may place considerable confidence in Mr. Holmes, sir,"
"He has his own little methods, which are, if hewon’t mind my saying so, just a little too theoretical and fantastic,but he has the makings of a detective in him. It is not too much to saythat once or twice, as in that business of the Sholto murder and theAgra treasure, he has been more nearly correct than the officialforce."
"Oh, if you say so, Mr. Jones, it is all right,"
"Still, I confess that I miss my rubber. It is the firstSaturday night for seven-and-twenty years that I have not had myrubber."
"I think you will find,"
"that you will play fora higher stake to-night than you have ever done yet, and that the playwill be more exciting. For you, Mr. Merryweather, the stake will besome £ 30,000; and for you, Jones, it will be the man upon whom youwish to lay your hands."
"John Clay, the murderer, thief, smasher, and forger. He’s a young man,Mr. Merryweather, but he is at the head of his profession, and I wouldrather have my bracelets on him than on any criminal in London. He’s aremarkable man, is young John Clay. His grandfather was a royal duke,and he himself has been to Eton and Oxford. His brain is as cunning ashis fingers, and though we meet signs of him at every turn, we neverknow where to find the man himself. He’ll crack a crib in Scotland oneweek, and be raising money to build an orphanage in Cornwall the next.I’ve been on his track for years and have never set eyes on him yet."
"I hope that I may have the pleasure of introducing you to-night. I’vehad one or two little turns also with Mr. John Clay, and I agree withyou that he is at the head of his profession. It is past ten, however,and quite time that we started. If you two will take the first hansom,Watson and I will follow in the second."
"We are close there now,"
"This fellow Merryweatheris a bank director, and personally interested in the matter. I thoughtit as well to have Jones with us also. He is not a bad fellow, thoughan absolute imbecile in his profession. He has one positive virtue. Heis as brave as a bulldog and as tenacious as a lobster if he gets hisclaws upon anyone. Here we are, and they are waiting for us."
"You are not very vulnerable from above,"
"Nor from below,"
"Why, dear me, it sounds quite hollow!"
"I must really ask you to be a little more quiet!"
"You have already imperilled the whole success of ourexpedition. Might I beg that you would have the goodness to sit downupon one of those boxes, and not to interfere?"
"We have at least an hour before us,"
"for they can hardlytake any steps until the good pawnbroker is safely in bed. Then theywill not lose a minute, for the sooner they do their work the longertime they will have for their escape. We are at present, Doctor—as nodoubt you have divined—in the cellar of the City branch of one of theprincipal London banks. Mr. Merryweather is the chairman of directors,and he will explain to you that there are reasons why the more daringcriminals of London should take a considerable interest in this cellarat present."
"It is our French gold,"
"We have had severalwarnings that an attempt might be made upon it."
"Your French gold?"
"Yes. We had occasion some months ago to strengthen our resources andborrowed for that purpose 30,000 napoleons from the Bank of France. Ithas become known that we have never had occasion to unpack the money,and that it is still lying in our cellar. The crate upon which I sitcontains 2,000 napoleons packed between layers of lead foil. Ourreserve of bullion is much larger at present than is usually kept in asingle branch office, and the directors have had misgivings upon thesubject."
"Which were very well justified,"
"And now it is timethat we arranged our little plans. I expect that within an hour matterswill come to a head. In the meantime Mr. Merryweather, we must put thescreen over that dark lantern."
"And sit in the dark?"
"I am afraid so. I had brought a pack of cards in my pocket, and Ithought that, as we were a _partie carrée_, you might have your rubberafter all. But I see that the enemy’s preparations have gone so farthat we cannot risk the presence of a light. And, first of all, we mustchoose our positions. These are daring men, and though we shall takethem at a disadvantage, they may do us some harm unless we are careful.I shall stand behind this crate, and do you conceal yourselves behindthose. Then, when I flash a light upon them, close in swiftly. If theyfire, Watson, have no compunction about shooting them down."
"They have but one retreat,"
"That is back throughthe house into Saxe-Coburg Square. I hope that you have done what Iasked you, Jones?"
"I have an inspector and two officers waiting at the front door."
"Then we have stopped all the holes. And now we must be silent andwait."
"It’s all clear,"
"Have you the chisel and the bags?Great Scott! Jump, Archie, jump, and I’ll swing for it!"
"It’s no use, John Clay,"
"You have no chance atall."
"So I see,"
"I fancy thatmy pal is all right, though I see you have got his coat-tails."
"There are three men waiting for him at the door,"
"Oh, indeed! You seem to have done the thing very completely. I mustcompliment you."
"And I you,"
"Your red-headed idea was very new andeffective."
"You’ll see your pal again presently,"
"He’s quicker atclimbing down holes than I am. Just hold out while I fix the derbies."
"I beg that you will not touch me with your filthy hands,"
"You may not beaware that I have royal blood in my veins. Have the goodness, also,when you address me always to say ‘sir’ and ‘please.’"
"All right,"
"Well, would youplease, sir, march upstairs, where we can get a cab to carry yourHighness to the police-station?"
"That is better,"
"Really, Mr. Holmes,"
"I do not know how the bank can thank you or repay you.There is no doubt that you have detected and defeated in the mostcomplete manner one of the most determined attempts at bank robberythat have ever come within my experience."
"I have had one or two little scores of my own to settle with Mr. JohnClay,"
"I have been at some small expense over thismatter, which I shall expect the bank to refund, but beyond that I amamply repaid by having had an experience which is in many ways unique,and by hearing the very remarkable narrative of the Red-headed League."
"You see, Watson,"
"it was perfectlyobvious from the first that the only possible object of this ratherfantastic business of the advertisement of the League, and the copyingof the _Encyclopædia_, must be to get this not over-bright pawnbrokerout of the way for a number of hours every day. It was a curious way ofmanaging it, but, really, it would be difficult to suggest a better.The method was no doubt suggested to Clay’s ingenious mind by thecolour of his accomplice’s hair. The £ 4 a week was a lure which mustdraw him, and what was it to them, who were playing for thousands? Theyput in the advertisement, one rogue has the temporary office, the otherrogue incites the man to apply for it, and together they manage tosecure his absence every morning in the week. From the time that Iheard of the assistant having come for half wages, it was obvious to methat he had some strong motive for securing the situation."
"But how could you guess what the motive was?"
"So far I had got when we went to visit the scene of action. Isurprised you by beating upon the pavement with my stick. I wasascertaining whether the cellar stretched out in front or behind. Itwas not in front. Then I rang the bell, and, as I hoped, the assistantanswered it. We have had some skirmishes, but we had never set eyesupon each other before. I hardly looked at his face. His knees werewhat I wished to see. You must yourself have remarked how worn,wrinkled, and stained they were. They spoke of those hours ofburrowing. The only remaining point was what they were burrowing for. Iwalked round the corner, saw the City and Suburban Bank abutted on ourfriend’s premises, and felt that I had solved my problem. When youdrove home after the concert I called upon Scotland Yard and upon thechairman of the bank directors, with the result that you have seen."
"And how could you tell that they would make their attempt to-night?"
"Well, when they closed their League offices that was a sign that theycared no longer about Mr. Jabez Wilson’s presence—in other words, thatthey had completed their tunnel. But it was essential that they shoulduse it soon, as it might be discovered, or the bullion might beremoved. Saturday would suit them better than any other day, as itwould give them two days for their escape. For all these reasons Iexpected them to come to-night."
"You reasoned it out beautifully,"
"It is so long a chain, and yet every link rings true."
"It saved me from ennui,"
"Alas! I already feelit closing in upon me. My life is spent in one long effort to escapefrom the commonplaces of existence. These little problems help me to doso."
"And you are a benefactor of the race,"
"Well, perhaps, after all, it is of somelittle use,"
"‘_L’homme c’est rien—l’œuvre c’est tout_,’as Gustave Flaubert wrote to George Sand."
"My dear fellow,"
"life is infinitely stranger thananything which the mind of man could invent. We would not dare toconceive the things which are really mere commonplaces of existence. Ifwe could fly out of that window hand in hand, hover over this greatcity, gently remove the roofs, and peep in at the queer things whichare going on, the strange coincidences, the plannings, thecross-purposes, the wonderful chains of events, working throughgenerations, and leading to the most _outré_ results, it would make allfiction with its conventionalities and foreseen conclusions most staleand unprofitable."
"And yet I am not convinced of it,"
"The cases which cometo light in the papers are, as a rule, bald enough, and vulgar enough.We have in our police reports realism pushed to its extreme limits, andyet the result is, it must be confessed, neither fascinating norartistic."
"A certain selection and discretion must be used in producing arealistic effect,"
"This is wanting in the policereport, where more stress is laid, perhaps, upon the platitudes of themagistrate than upon the details, which to an observer contain thevital essence of the whole matter. Depend upon it, there is nothing sounnatural as the commonplace."
"I can quite understand your thinking so,"
"Of course, in your position of unofficial adviser and helperto everybody who is absolutely puzzled, throughout three continents,you are brought in contact with all that is strange and bizarre. Buthere"
"let us put it to apractical test. Here is the first heading upon which I come. ‘Ahusband’s cruelty to his wife.’ There is half a column of print, but Iknow without reading it that it is all perfectly familiar to me. Thereis, of course, the other woman, the drink, the push, the blow, thebruise, the sympathetic sister or landlady. The crudest of writerscould invent nothing more crude."
"Indeed, your example is an unfortunate one for your argument,"
"This is theDundas separation case, and, as it happens, I was engaged in clearingup some small points in connection with it. The husband was ateetotaler, there was no other woman, and the conduct complained of wasthat he had drifted into the habit of winding up every meal by takingout his false teeth and hurling them at his wife, which, you willallow, is not an action likely to occur to the imagination of theaverage story-teller. Take a pinch of snuff, Doctor, and acknowledgethat I have scored over you in your example."
"Ah,"
"I forgot that I had not seen you for some weeks. It isa little souvenir from the King of Bohemia in return for my assistancein the case of the Irene Adler papers."
"And the ring?"
"It was from the reigning family of Holland, though the matter in whichI served them was of such delicacy that I cannot confide it even toyou, who have been good enough to chronicle one or two of my littleproblems."
"And have you any on hand just now?"
"Some ten or twelve, but none which present any feature of interest.They are important, you understand, without being interesting. Indeed,I have found that it is usually in unimportant matters that there is afield for the observation, and for the quick analysis of cause andeffect which gives the charm to an investigation. The larger crimes areapt to be the simpler, for the bigger the crime the more obvious, as arule, is the motive. In these cases, save for one rather intricatematter which has been referred to me from Marseilles, there is nothingwhich presents any features of interest. It is possible, however, thatI may have something better before very many minutes are over, for thisis one of my clients, or I am much mistaken."
"I have seen those symptoms before,"
"Oscillation upon the pavement always means an_affaire de cœur_. She would like advice, but is not sure that thematter is not too delicate for communication. And yet even here we maydiscriminate. When a woman has been seriously wronged by a man she nolonger oscillates, and the usual symptom is a broken bell wire. Here wemay take it that there is a love matter, but that the maiden is not somuch angry as perplexed, or grieved. But here she comes in person toresolve our doubts."
"Do you not find,"
"that with your short sight it is a littletrying to do so much typewriting?"
"I did at first,"
"but now I know where the letters arewithout looking."
"You’ve heard aboutme, Mr. Holmes,"
"else how could you know all that?"
"Never mind,"
"it is my business to know things.Perhaps I have trained myself to see what others overlook. If not, whyshould you come to consult me?"
"I came to you, sir, because I heard of you from Mrs. Etherege, whosehusband you found so easy when the police and everyone had given him upfor dead. Oh, Mr. Holmes, I wish you would do as much for me. I’m notrich, but still I have a hundred a year in my own right, besides thelittle that I make by the machine, and I would give it all to know whathas become of Mr. Hosmer Angel."
"Why did you come away to consult me in such a hurry?"
"Yes, I did bang out of the house,"
"for it mademe angry to see the easy way in which Mr. Windibank—that is, myfather—took it all. He would not go to the police, and he would not goto you, and so at last, as he would do nothing and kept on saying thatthere was no harm done, it made me mad, and I just on with my thingsand came right away to you."
"Your father,"
"your stepfather, surely, since the name isdifferent."
"Yes, my stepfather. I call him father, though it sounds funny, too,for he is only five years and two months older than myself."
"And your mother is alive?"
"Oh, yes, mother is alive and well. I wasn’t best pleased, Mr. Holmes,when she married again so soon after father’s death, and a man who wasnearly fifteen years younger than herself. Father was a plumber in theTottenham Court Road, and he left a tidy business behind him, whichmother carried on with Mr. Hardy, the foreman; but when Mr. Windibankcame he made her sell the business, for he was very superior, being atraveller in wines. They got £ 4700 for the goodwill and interest,which wasn’t near as much as father could have got if he had beenalive."
"Your own little income,"
"does it come out of the business?"
"Oh, no, sir. It is quite separate and was left me by my uncle Ned inAuckland. It is in New Zealand stock, paying 4½ per cent. Two thousandfive hundred pounds was the amount, but I can only touch the interest."
"You interest me extremely,"
"And since you draw so largea sum as a hundred a year, with what you earn into the bargain, you nodoubt travel a little and indulge yourself in every way. I believe thata single lady can get on very nicely upon an income of about £ 60."
"I could do with much less than that, Mr. Holmes, but you understandthat as long as I live at home I don’t wish to be a burden to them, andso they have the use of the money just while I am staying with them. Ofcourse, that is only just for the time. Mr. Windibank draws my interestevery quarter and pays it over to mother, and I find that I can dopretty well with what I earn at typewriting. It brings me twopence asheet, and I can often do from fifteen to twenty sheets in a day."
"You have made your position very clear to me,"
"This ismy friend, Dr. Watson, before whom you can speak as freely as beforemyself. Kindly tell us now all about your connection with Mr. HosmerAngel."
"I met him first at the gasfitters’ ball,"
"They used to send father tickets when he was alive, and thenafterwards they remembered us, and sent them to mother. Mr. Windibankdid not wish us to go. He never did wish us to go anywhere. He wouldget quite mad if I wanted so much as to join a Sunday-school treat. Butthis time I was set on going, and I would go; for what right had he toprevent? He said the folk were not fit for us to know, when allfather’s friends were to be there. And he said that I had nothing fitto wear, when I had my purple plush that I had never so much as takenout of the drawer. At last, when nothing else would do, he went off toFrance upon the business of the firm, but we went, mother and I, withMr. Hardy, who used to be our foreman, and it was there I met Mr.Hosmer Angel."
"I suppose,"
"that when Mr. Windibank came back fromFrance he was very annoyed at your having gone to the ball."
"Oh, well, he was very good about it. He laughed, I remember, andshrugged his shoulders, and said there was no use denying anything to awoman, for she would have her way."
"I see. Then at the gasfitters’ ball you met, as I understand, agentleman called Mr. Hosmer Angel."
"Yes, sir. I met him that night, and he called next day to ask if wehad got home all safe, and after that we met him—that is to say, Mr.Holmes, I met him twice for walks, but after that father came backagain, and Mr. Hosmer Angel could not come to the house any more."
"No?"
"Well, you know father didn’t like anything of the sort. He wouldn’thave any visitors if he could help it, and he used to say that a womanshould be happy in her own family circle. But then, as I used to say tomother, a woman wants her own circle to begin with, and I had not gotmine yet."
"But how about Mr. Hosmer Angel? Did he make no attempt to see you?"
"Well, father was going off to France again in a week, and Hosmer wroteand said that it would be safer and better not to see each other untilhe had gone. We could write in the meantime, and he used to write everyday. I took the letters in in the morning, so there was no need forfather to know."
"Were you engaged to the gentleman at this time?"
"Oh, yes, Mr. Holmes. We were engaged after the first walk that wetook. Hosmer—Mr. Angel—was a cashier in an office in LeadenhallStreet—and—"
"What office?"
"That’s the worst of it, Mr. Holmes, I don’t know."
"Where did he live, then?"
"He slept on the premises."
"And you don’t know his address?"
"No—except that it was Leadenhall Street."
"Where did you address your letters, then?"
"To the Leadenhall Street Post Office, to be left till called for. Hesaid that if they were sent to the office he would be chaffed by allthe other clerks about having letters from a lady, so I offered totypewrite them, like he did his, but he wouldn’t have that, for he saidthat when I wrote them they seemed to come from me, but when they weretypewritten he always felt that the machine had come between us. Thatwill just show you how fond he was of me, Mr. Holmes, and the littlethings that he would think of."
"It was most suggestive,"
"It has long been an axiom ofmine that the little things are infinitely the most important. Can youremember any other little things about Mr. Hosmer Angel?"
"He was a very shy man, Mr. Holmes. He would rather walk with me in theevening than in the daylight, for he said that he hated to beconspicuous. Very retiring and gentlemanly he was. Even his voice wasgentle. He’d had the quinsy and swollen glands when he was young, hetold me, and it had left him with a weak throat, and a hesitating,whispering fashion of speech. He was always well dressed, very neat andplain, but his eyes were weak, just as mine are, and he wore tintedglasses against the glare."
"Well, and what happened when Mr. Windibank, your stepfather, returnedto France?"
"Mr. Hosmer Angel came to the house again and proposed that we shouldmarry before father came back. He was in dreadful earnest and made meswear, with my hands on the Testament, that whatever happened I wouldalways be true to him. Mother said he was quite right to make me swear,and that it was a sign of his passion. Mother was all in his favourfrom the first and was even fonder of him than I was. Then, when theytalked of marrying within the week, I began to ask about father; butthey both said never to mind about father, but just to tell himafterwards, and mother said she would make it all right with him. Ididn’t quite like that, Mr. Holmes. It seemed funny that I should askhis leave, as he was only a few years older than me; but I didn’t wantto do anything on the sly, so I wrote to father at Bordeaux, where thecompany has its French offices, but the letter came back to me on thevery morning of the wedding."
"It missed him, then?"
"Yes, sir; for he had started to England just before it arrived."
"Ha! that was unfortunate. Your wedding was arranged, then, for theFriday. Was it to be in church?"
"Yes, sir, but very quietly. It was to be at St. Saviour’s, near King’sCross, and we were to have breakfast afterwards at the St. PancrasHotel. Hosmer came for us in a hansom, but as there were two of us heput us both into it and stepped himself into a four-wheeler, whichhappened to be the only other cab in the street. We got to the churchfirst, and when the four-wheeler drove up we waited for him to stepout, but he never did, and when the cabman got down from the box andlooked there was no one there! The cabman said that he could notimagine what had become of him, for he had seen him get in with his owneyes. That was last Friday, Mr. Holmes, and I have never seen or heardanything since then to throw any light upon what became of him."
"It seems to me that you have been very shamefully treated,"
"Oh, no, sir! He was too good and kind to leave me so. Why, all themorning he was saying to me that, whatever happened, I was to be true;and that even if something quite unforeseen occurred to separate us, Iwas always to remember that I was pledged to him, and that he wouldclaim his pledge sooner or later. It seemed strange talk for awedding-morning, but what has happened since gives a meaning to it."
"Most certainly it does. Your own opinion is, then, that someunforeseen catastrophe has occurred to him?"
"Yes, sir. I believe that he foresaw some danger, or else he would nothave talked so. And then I think that what he foresaw happened."
"But you have no notion as to what it could have been?"
"None."
"One more question. How did your mother take the matter?"
"She was angry, and said that I was never to speak of the matteragain."
"And your father? Did you tell him?"
"Yes; and he seemed to think, with me, that something had happened, andthat I should hear of Hosmer again. As he said, what interest couldanyone have in bringing me to the doors of the church, and then leavingme? Now, if he had borrowed my money, or if he had married me and gotmy money settled on him, there might be some reason, but Hosmer wasvery independent about money and never would look at a shilling ofmine. And yet, what could have happened? And why could he not write?Oh, it drives me half-mad to think of it, and I can’t sleep a wink atnight."
"I shall glance into the case for you,"
"and Ihave no doubt that we shall reach some definite result. Let the weightof the matter rest upon me now, and do not let your mind dwell upon itfurther. Above all, try to let Mr. Hosmer Angel vanish from yourmemory, as he has done from your life."
"Then you don’t think I’ll see him again?"
"I fear not."
"Then what has happened to him?"
"You will leave that question in my hands. I should like an accuratedescription of him and any letters of his which you can spare."
"I advertised for him in last Saturday’s _Chronicle_,"
"Hereis the slip and here are four letters from him."
"Thank you. And your address?"
"No. 31 Lyon Place, Camberwell."
"Mr. Angel’s address you never had, I understand. Where is yourfather’s place of business?"
"He travels for Westhouse & Marbank, the great claret importers ofFenchurch Street."
"Thank you. You have made your statement very clearly. You will leavethe papers here, and remember the advice which I have given you. Letthe whole incident be a sealed book, and do not allow it to affect yourlife."
"You are very kind, Mr. Holmes, but I cannot do that. I shall be trueto Hosmer. He shall find me ready when he comes back."
"Quite an interesting study, that maiden,"
"I found hermore interesting than her little problem, which, by the way, is rathera trite one. You will find parallel cases, if you consult my index, inAndover in ’77, and there was something of the sort at The Hague lastyear. Old as is the idea, however, there were one or two details whichwere new to me. But the maiden herself was most instructive."
"You appeared to read a good deal upon her which was quite invisible tome,"
"Not invisible but unnoticed, Watson. You did not know where to look,and so you missed all that was important. I can never bring you torealise the importance of sleeves, the suggestiveness of thumb-nails,or the great issues that may hang from a boot-lace. Now, what did yougather from that woman’s appearance? Describe it."
"Well, she had a slate-coloured, broad-brimmed straw hat, with afeather of a brickish red. Her jacket was black, with black beads sewnupon it, and a fringe of little black jet ornaments. Her dress wasbrown, rather darker than coffee colour, with a little purple plush atthe neck and sleeves. Her gloves were greyish and were worn through atthe right forefinger. Her boots I didn’t observe. She had small round,hanging gold earrings, and a general air of being fairly well-to-do ina vulgar, comfortable, easy-going way."
"’Pon my word, Watson, you are coming along wonderfully. You havereally done very well indeed. It is true that you have missedeverything of importance, but you have hit upon the method, and youhave a quick eye for colour. Never trust to general impressions, myboy, but concentrate yourself upon details. My first glance is alwaysat a woman’s sleeve. In a man it is perhaps better first to take theknee of the trouser. As you observe, this woman had plush upon hersleeves, which is a most useful material for showing traces. The doubleline a little above the wrist, where the typewritist presses againstthe table, was beautifully defined. The sewing-machine, of the handtype, leaves a similar mark, but only on the left arm, and on the sideof it farthest from the thumb, instead of being right across thebroadest part, as this was. I then glanced at her face, and, observingthe dint of a pince-nez at either side of her nose, I ventured a remarkupon short sight and typewriting, which seemed to surprise her."
"It surprised me."
"But, surely, it was obvious. I was then much surprised and interestedon glancing down to observe that, though the boots which she waswearing were not unlike each other, they were really odd ones; the onehaving a slightly decorated toe-cap, and the other a plain one. One wasbuttoned only in the two lower buttons out of five, and the other atthe first, third, and fifth. Now, when you see that a young lady,otherwise neatly dressed, has come away from home with odd boots,half-buttoned, it is no great deduction to say that she came away in ahurry."
"And what else?"
"I noted, in passing, that she had written a note before leaving homebut after being fully dressed. You observed that her right glove wastorn at the forefinger, but you did not apparently see that both gloveand finger were stained with violet ink. She had written in a hurry anddipped her pen too deep. It must have been this morning, or the markwould not remain clear upon the finger. All this is amusing, thoughrather elementary, but I must go back to business, Watson. Would youmind reading me the advertised description of Mr. Hosmer Angel?"
"Missing,"
"onthe morning of the fourteenth, a gentleman named Hosmer Angel. Aboutfive ft. seven in. in height; strongly built, sallow complexion, blackhair, a little bald in the centre, bushy, black side-whiskers andmoustache; tinted glasses, slight infirmity of speech. Was dressed,when last seen, in black frock-coat faced with silk, black waistcoat,gold Albert chain, and grey Harris tweed trousers, with brown gaitersover elastic-sided boots. Known to have been employed in an office inLeadenhall Street. Anybody bringing,"
"That will do,"
"As to the letters,"
"they are very commonplace. Absolutely no clue inthem to Mr. Angel, save that he quotes Balzac once. There is oneremarkable point, however, which will no doubt strike you."
"They are typewritten,"
"Not only that, but the signature is typewritten. Look at the neatlittle ‘Hosmer Angel’ at the bottom. There is a date, you see, but nosuperscription except Leadenhall Street, which is rather vague. Thepoint about the signature is very suggestive—in fact, we may call itconclusive."
"Of what?"
"My dear fellow, is it possible you do not see how strongly it bearsupon the case?"
"I cannot say that I do unless it were that he wished to be able todeny his signature if an action for breach of promise were instituted."
"No, that was not the point. However, I shall write two letters, whichshould settle the matter. One is to a firm in the City, the other is tothe young lady’s stepfather, Mr. Windibank, asking him whether he couldmeet us here at six o’clock to-morrow evening. It is just as well thatwe should do business with the male relatives. And now, Doctor, we cando nothing until the answers to those letters come, so we may put ourlittle problem upon the shelf for the interim."
"Well, have you solved it?"
"Yes. It was the bisulphate of baryta."
"No, no, the mystery!"
"Oh, that! I thought of the salt that I have been working upon. Therewas never any mystery in the matter, though, as I said yesterday, someof the details are of interest. The only drawback is that there is nolaw, I fear, that can touch the scoundrel."
"Who was he, then, and what was his object in deserting MissSutherland?"
"This is the girl’s stepfather, Mr. James Windibank,"
"Hehas written to me to say that he would be here at six. Come in!"
"Good-evening, Mr. James Windibank,"
"I think that thistypewritten letter is from you, in which you made an appointment withme for six o’clock?"
"Yes, sir. I am afraid that I am a little late, but I am not quite myown master, you know. I am sorry that Miss Sutherland has troubled youabout this little matter, for I think it is far better not to washlinen of the sort in public. It was quite against my wishes that shecame, but she is a very excitable, impulsive girl, as you may havenoticed, and she is not easily controlled when she has made up her mindon a point. Of course, I did not mind you so much, as you are notconnected with the official police, but it is not pleasant to have afamily misfortune like this noised abroad. Besides, it is a uselessexpense, for how could you possibly find this Hosmer Angel?"
"On the contrary,"
"I have every reason to believethat I will succeed in discovering Mr. Hosmer Angel."
"I amdelighted to hear it,"
"It is a curious thing,"
"that a typewriter has reallyquite as much individuality as a man’s handwriting. Unless they arequite new, no two of them write exactly alike. Some letters get moreworn than others, and some wear only on one side. Now, you remark inthis note of yours, Mr. Windibank, that in every case there is somelittle slurring over of the ‘e,’ and a slight defect in the tail of the‘r.’ There are fourteen other characteristics, but those are the moreobvious."
"We do all our correspondence with this machine at the office, and nodoubt it is a little worn,"
"And now I will show you what is really a very interesting study, Mr.Windibank,"
"I think of writing another littlemonograph some of these days on the typewriter and its relation tocrime. It is a subject to which I have devoted some little attention. Ihave here four letters which purport to come from the missing man. Theyare all typewritten. In each case, not only are the ‘e’s’ slurred andthe ‘r’s’ tailless, but you will observe, if you care to use mymagnifying lens, that the fourteen other characteristics to which Ihave alluded are there as well."
"I cannotwaste time over this sort of fantastic talk, Mr. Holmes,"
"Ifyou can catch the man, catch him, and let me know when you have doneit."
"Certainly,"
"I let you know, then, that I have caught him!"
"What! where?"
"Oh, it won’t do—really it won’t,"
"There is nopossible getting out of it, Mr. Windibank. It is quite too transparent,and it was a very bad compliment when you said that it was impossiblefor me to solve so simple a question. That’s right! Sit down and let ustalk it over."
"It—it’s not actionable,"
"I am very much afraid that it is not. But between ourselves,Windibank, it was as cruel and selfish and heartless a trick in a pettyway as ever came before me. Now, let me just run over the course ofevents, and you will contradict me if I go wrong."
"The man married a woman very much older than himself for her money,"
"and he enjoyed the use of the money of the daughter as longas she lived with them. It was a considerable sum, for people in theirposition, and the loss of it would have made a serious difference. Itwas worth an effort to preserve it. The daughter was of a good, amiabledisposition, but affectionate and warm-hearted in her ways, so that itwas evident that with her fair personal advantages, and her littleincome, she would not be allowed to remain single long. Now hermarriage would mean, of course, the loss of a hundred a year, so whatdoes her stepfather do to prevent it? He takes the obvious course ofkeeping her at home and forbidding her to seek the company of people ofher own age. But soon he found that that would not answer forever. Shebecame restive, insisted upon her rights, and finally announced herpositive intention of going to a certain ball. What does her cleverstepfather do then? He conceives an idea more creditable to his headthan to his heart. With the connivance and assistance of his wife hedisguised himself, covered those keen eyes with tinted glasses, maskedthe face with a moustache and a pair of bushy whiskers, sunk that clearvoice into an insinuating whisper, and doubly secure on account of thegirl’s short sight, he appears as Mr. Hosmer Angel, and keeps off otherlovers by making love himself."
"It was only a joke at first,"
"We never thoughtthat she would have been so carried away."
"Very likely not. However that may be, the young lady was verydecidedly carried away, and, having quite made up her mind that herstepfather was in France, the suspicion of treachery never for aninstant entered her mind. She was flattered by the gentleman’sattentions, and the effect was increased by the loudly expressedadmiration of her mother. Then Mr. Angel began to call, for it wasobvious that the matter should be pushed as far as it would go if areal effect were to be produced. There were meetings, and anengagement, which would finally secure the girl’s affections fromturning towards anyone else. But the deception could not be kept upforever. These pretended journeys to France were rather cumbrous. Thething to do was clearly to bring the business to an end in such adramatic manner that it would leave a permanent impression upon theyoung lady’s mind and prevent her from looking upon any other suitorfor some time to come. Hence those vows of fidelity exacted upon aTestament, and hence also the allusions to a possibility of somethinghappening on the very morning of the wedding. James Windibank wishedMiss Sutherland to be so bound to Hosmer Angel, and so uncertain as tohis fate, that for ten years to come, at any rate, she would not listento another man. As far as the church door he brought her, and then, ashe could go no farther, he conveniently vanished away by the old trickof stepping in at one door of a four-wheeler and out at the other. Ithink that was the chain of events, Mr. Windibank!"
"It may be so, or it may not, Mr. Holmes,"
"but if you are sovery sharp you ought to be sharp enough to know that it is you who arebreaking the law now, and not me. I have done nothing actionable fromthe first, but as long as you keep that door locked you lay yourselfopen to an action for assault and illegal constraint."
"The law cannot, as you say, touch you,"
"yet there never was a man who deservedpunishment more. If the young lady has a brother or a friend, he oughtto lay a whip across your shoulders. By Jove!"
"it is notpart of my duties to my client, but here’s a hunting crop handy, and Ithink I shall just treat myself to—"
"There’s a cold-blooded scoundrel!"
"That fellow will rise fromcrime to crime until he does something very bad, and ends on a gallows.The case has, in some respects, been not entirely devoid of interest."
"I cannot now entirely see all the steps of your reasoning,"
"Well, of course it was obvious from the first that this Mr. HosmerAngel must have some strong object for his curious conduct, and it wasequally clear that the only man who really profited by the incident, asfar as we could see, was the stepfather. Then the fact that the two menwere never together, but that the one always appeared when the otherwas away, was suggestive. So were the tinted spectacles and the curiousvoice, which both hinted at a disguise, as did the bushy whiskers. Mysuspicions were all confirmed by his peculiar action in typewriting hissignature, which, of course, inferred that his handwriting was sofamiliar to her that she would recognise even the smallest sample ofit. You see all these isolated facts, together with many minor ones,all pointed in the same direction."
"And how did you verify them?"
"Having once spotted my man, it was easy to get corroboration. I knewthe firm for which this man worked. Having taken the printeddescription. I eliminated everything from it which could be the resultof a disguise—the whiskers, the glasses, the voice, and I sent it tothe firm, with a request that they would inform me whether it answeredto the description of any of their travellers. I had already noticedthe peculiarities of the typewriter, and I wrote to the man himself athis business address asking him if he would come here. As I expected,his reply was typewritten and revealed the same trivial butcharacteristic defects. The same post brought me a letter fromWesthouse & Marbank, of Fenchurch Street, to say that the descriptiontallied in every respect with that of their employé, James Windibank._Voilà tout_!"
"And Miss Sutherland?"
"If I tell her she will not believe me. You may remember the oldPersian saying, ‘There is danger for him who taketh the tiger cub, anddanger also for whoso snatches a delusion from a woman.’ There is asmuch sense in Hafiz as in Horace, and as much knowledge of the world."
"Have you a couple of days to spare? Have just been wired for from thewest of England in connection with Boscombe Valley tragedy. Shall beglad if you will come with me. Air and scenery perfect. LeavePaddington by the 11:15."
"What do you say, dear?"
"Will yougo?"
"I really don’t know what to say. I have a fairly long list atpresent."
"Oh, Anstruther would do your work for you. You have been looking alittle pale lately. I think that the change would do you good, and youare always so interested in Mr. Sherlock Holmes’ cases."
"I should be ungrateful if I were not, seeing what I gained through oneof them,"
"But if I am to go, I must pack at once, for Ihave only half an hour."
"It is really very good of you to come, Watson,"
"It makes aconsiderable difference to me, having someone with me on whom I canthoroughly rely. Local aid is always either worthless or else biassed.If you will keep the two corner seats I shall get the tickets."
"Have you heard anything of the case?"
"Not a word. I have not seen a paper for some days."
"The London press has not had very full accounts. I have just beenlooking through all the recent papers in order to master theparticulars. It seems, from what I gather, to be one of those simplecases which are so extremely difficult."
"That sounds a little paradoxical."
"But it is profoundly true. Singularity is almost invariably a clue.The more featureless and commonplace a crime is, the more difficult itis to bring it home. In this case, however, they have established avery serious case against the son of the murdered man."
"It is a murder, then?"
"The two McCarthys were seen after the time when William Crowder, thegame-keeper, lost sight of them. The Boscombe Pool is thickly woodedround, with just a fringe of grass and of reeds round the edge. A girlof fourteen, Patience Moran, who is the daughter of the lodge-keeper ofthe Boscombe Valley estate, was in one of the woods picking flowers.She states that while she was there she saw, at the border of the woodand close by the lake, Mr. McCarthy and his son, and that they appearedto be having a violent quarrel. She heard Mr. McCarthy the elder usingvery strong language to his son, and she saw the latter raise up hishand as if to strike his father. She was so frightened by theirviolence that she ran away and told her mother when she reached homethat she had left the two McCarthys quarrelling near Boscombe Pool, andthat she was afraid that they were going to fight. She had hardly saidthe words when young Mr. McCarthy came running up to the lodge to saythat he had found his father dead in the wood, and to ask for the helpof the lodge-keeper. He was much excited, without either his gun or hishat, and his right hand and sleeve were observed to be stained withfresh blood. On following him they found the dead body stretched outupon the grass beside the pool. The head had been beaten in by repeatedblows of some heavy and blunt weapon. The injuries were such as mightvery well have been inflicted by the butt-end of his son’s gun, whichwas found lying on the grass within a few paces of the body. Underthese circumstances the young man was instantly arrested, and a verdictof ‘wilful murder’ having been returned at the inquest on Tuesday, hewas on Wednesday brought before the magistrates at Ross, who havereferred the case to the next Assizes. Those are the main facts of thecase as they came out before the coroner and the police-court."
"I could hardly imagine a more damning case,"
"If evercircumstantial evidence pointed to a criminal it does so here."
"Circumstantial evidence is a very tricky thing,"
"It may seem to point very straight to one thing, but ifyou shift your own point of view a little, you may find it pointing inan equally uncompromising manner to something entirely different. Itmust be confessed, however, that the case looks exceedingly graveagainst the young man, and it is very possible that he is indeed theculprit. There are several people in the neighbourhood, however, andamong them Miss Turner, the daughter of the neighbouring landowner, whobelieve in his innocence, and who have retained Lestrade, whom you mayrecollect in connection with the Study in Scarlet, to work out the casein his interest. Lestrade, being rather puzzled, has referred the caseto me, and hence it is that two middle-aged gentlemen are flyingwestward at fifty miles an hour instead of quietly digesting theirbreakfasts at home."
"I am afraid,"
"that the facts are so obvious that you willfind little credit to be gained out of this case."
"There is nothing more deceptive than an obvious fact,"
"Besides, we may chance to hit upon some other obvious factswhich may have been by no means obvious to Mr. Lestrade. You know metoo well to think that I am boasting when I say that I shall eitherconfirm or destroy his theory by means which he is quite incapable ofemploying, or even of understanding. To take the first example to hand,I very clearly perceive that in your bedroom the window is upon theright-hand side, and yet I question whether Mr. Lestrade would havenoted even so self-evident a thing as that."
"How on earth—"
"My dear fellow, I know you well. I know the military neatness whichcharacterises you. You shave every morning, and in this season youshave by the sunlight; but since your shaving is less and less completeas we get farther back on the left side, until it becomes positivelyslovenly as we get round the angle of the jaw, it is surely very clearthat that side is less illuminated than the other. I could not imaginea man of your habits looking at himself in an equal light and beingsatisfied with such a result. I only quote this as a trivial example ofobservation and inference. Therein lies my _métier_, and it is justpossible that it may be of some service in the investigation which liesbefore us. There are one or two minor points which were brought out inthe inquest, and which are worth considering."
"What are they?"
"It appears that his arrest did not take place at once, but after thereturn to Hatherley Farm. On the inspector of constabulary informinghim that he was a prisoner, he remarked that he was not surprised tohear it, and that it was no more than his deserts. This observation ofhis had the natural effect of removing any traces of doubt which mighthave remained in the minds of the coroner’s jury."
"It was a confession,"
"No, for it was followed by a protestation of innocence."
"Coming on the top of such a damning series of events, it was at leasta most suspicious remark."
"On the contrary,"
"it is the brightest rift which I canat present see in the clouds. However innocent he might be, he couldnot be such an absolute imbecile as not to see that the circumstanceswere very black against him. Had he appeared surprised at his ownarrest, or feigned indignation at it, I should have looked upon it ashighly suspicious, because such surprise or anger would not be naturalunder the circumstances, and yet might appear to be the best policy toa scheming man. His frank acceptance of the situation marks him aseither an innocent man, or else as a man of considerable self-restraintand firmness. As to his remark about his deserts, it was also notunnatural if you consider that he stood beside the dead body of hisfather, and that there is no doubt that he had that very day so farforgotten his filial duty as to bandy words with him, and even,according to the little girl whose evidence is so important, to raisehis hand as if to strike him. The self-reproach and contrition whichare displayed in his remark appear to me to be the signs of a healthymind rather than of a guilty one."
"Many men have been hanged on far slighter evidence,"
"So they have. And many men have been wrongfully hanged."
"What is the young man’s own account of the matter?"
"It is, I am afraid, not very encouraging to his supporters, thoughthere are one or two points in it which are suggestive. You will findit here, and may read it for yourself."
"Mr. James McCarthy, the only son of the deceased, was then called andgave evidence as follows: ‘I had been away from home for three days atBristol, and had only just returned upon the morning of last Monday,the 3rd. My father was absent from home at the time of my arrival, andI was informed by the maid that he had driven over to Ross with JohnCobb, the groom. Shortly after my return I heard the wheels of his trapin the yard, and, looking out of my window, I saw him get out and walkrapidly out of the yard, though I was not aware in which direction hewas going. I then took my gun and strolled out in the direction of theBoscombe Pool, with the intention of visiting the rabbit warren whichis upon the other side. On my way I saw William Crowder, thegame-keeper, as he had stated in his evidence; but he is mistaken inthinking that I was following my father. I had no idea that he was infront of me. When about a hundred yards from the pool I heard a cry of"
"This concluded the examination of the witness."
"I see,"
"that the coroner in hisconcluding remarks was rather severe upon young McCarthy. He callsattention, and with reason, to the discrepancy about his father havingsignalled to him before seeing him, also to his refusal to give detailsof his conversation with his father, and his singular account of hisfather’s dying words. They are all, as he remarks, very much againstthe son."
"Both you and the coroner have been at some pains,"
"to single out the very strongest points in the young man’sfavour. Don’t you see that you alternately give him credit for havingtoo much imagination and too little? Too little, if he could not inventa cause of quarrel which would give him the sympathy of the jury; toomuch, if he evolved from his own inner consciousness anything so_outré_ as a dying reference to a rat, and the incident of thevanishing cloth. No, sir, I shall approach this case from the point ofview that what this young man says is true, and we shall see whitherthat hypothesis will lead us. And now here is my pocket Petrarch, andnot another word shall I say of this case until we are on the scene ofaction. We lunch at Swindon, and I see that we shall be there in twentyminutes."
"I have ordered a carriage,"
"I knew your energetic nature, and that you would not be happy untilyou had been on the scene of the crime."
"It was very nice and complimentary of you,"
"It isentirely a question of barometric pressure."
"I do not quite follow,"
"How is the glass? Twenty-nine, I see. No wind, and not a cloud in thesky. I have a caseful of cigarettes here which need smoking, and thesofa is very much superior to the usual country hotel abomination. I donot think that it is probable that I shall use the carriage to-night."
"You have, no doubt, already formed yourconclusions from the newspapers,"
"The case is as plain as apikestaff, and the more one goes into it the plainer it becomes. Still,of course, one can’t refuse a lady, and such a very positive one, too.She has heard of you, and would have your opinion, though I repeatedlytold her that there was nothing which you could do which I had notalready done. Why, bless my soul! here is her carriage at the door."
"Oh, Mr. Sherlock Holmes!"
"I am so glad that you have come. I have driven down to tellyou so. I know that James didn’t do it. I know it, and I want you tostart upon your work knowing it, too. Never let yourself doubt uponthat point. We have known each other since we were little children, andI know his faults as no one else does; but he is too tender-hearted tohurt a fly. Such a charge is absurd to anyone who really knows him."
"I hope we may clear him, Miss Turner,"
"You mayrely upon my doing all that I can."
"But you have read the evidence. You have formed some conclusion? Doyou not see some loophole, some flaw? Do you not yourself think that heis innocent?"
"I think that it is very probable."
"There, now!"
"You hear! He gives me hopes."
"I am afraid that my colleague hasbeen a little quick in forming his conclusions,"
"But he is right. Oh! I know that he is right. James never did it. Andabout his quarrel with his father, I am sure that the reason why hewould not speak about it to the coroner was because I was concerned init."
"In what way?"
"It is no time for me to hide anything. James and his father had manydisagreements about me. Mr. McCarthy was very anxious that there shouldbe a marriage between us. James and I have always loved each other asbrother and sister; but of course he is young and has seen very littleof life yet, and—and—well, he naturally did not wish to do anythinglike that yet. So there were quarrels, and this, I am sure, was one ofthem."
"And your father?"
"Was he in favour of such a union?"
"No, he was averse to it also. No one but Mr. McCarthy was in favour ofit."
"Thank you for this information,"
"May I see your father if Icall to-morrow?"
"I am afraid the doctor won’t allow it."
"The doctor?"
"Yes, have you not heard? Poor father has never been strong for yearsback, but this has broken him down completely. He has taken to his bed,and Dr. Willows says that he is a wreck and that his nervous system isshattered. Mr. McCarthy was the only man alive who had known dad in theold days in Victoria."
"Ha! In Victoria! That is important."
"Yes, at the mines."
"Quite so; at the gold-mines, where, as I understand, Mr. Turner madehis money."
"Yes, certainly."
"Thank you, Miss Turner. You have been of material assistance to me."
"You will tell me if you have any news to-morrow. No doubt you will goto the prison to see James. Oh, if you do, Mr. Holmes, do tell him thatI know him to be innocent."
"I will, Miss Turner."
"I must go home now, for dad is very ill, and he misses me so if Ileave him. Good-bye, and God help you in your undertaking."
"I am ashamed of you, Holmes,"
"Why should you raise up hopes which you are bound todisappoint? I am not over-tender of heart, but I call it cruel."
"I think that I see my way to clearing James McCarthy,"
"Have you an order to see him in prison?"
"Yes, but only for you and me."
"Then I shall reconsider my resolution about going out. We have stilltime to take a train to Hereford and see him to-night?"
"Ample."
"Then let us do so. Watson, I fear that you will find it very slow, butI shall only be away a couple of hours."
"The glass still keeps very high,"
"It isof importance that it should not rain before we are able to go over theground. On the other hand, a man should be at his very best and keenestfor such nice work as that, and I did not wish to do it when fagged bya long journey. I have seen young McCarthy."
"And what did you learn from him?"
"Nothing."
"Could he throw no light?"
"None at all. I was inclined to think at one time that he knew who haddone it and was screening him or her, but I am convinced now that he isas puzzled as everyone else. He is not a very quick-witted youth,though comely to look at and, I should think, sound at heart."
"I cannot admire his taste,"
"if it is indeed a fact thathe was averse to a marriage with so charming a young lady as this MissTurner."
"Ah, thereby hangs a rather painful tale. This fellow is madly,insanely, in love with her, but some two years ago, when he was only alad, and before he really knew her, for she had been away five years ata boarding-school, what does the idiot do but get into the clutches ofa barmaid in Bristol and marry her at a registry office? No one knows aword of the matter, but you can imagine how maddening it must be to himto be upbraided for not doing what he would give his very eyes to do,but what he knows to be absolutely impossible. It was sheer frenzy ofthis sort which made him throw his hands up into the air when hisfather, at their last interview, was goading him on to propose to MissTurner. On the other hand, he had no means of supporting himself, andhis father, who was by all accounts a very hard man, would have thrownhim over utterly had he known the truth. It was with his barmaid wifethat he had spent the last three days in Bristol, and his father didnot know where he was. Mark that point. It is of importance. Good hascome out of evil, however, for the barmaid, finding from the papersthat he is in serious trouble and likely to be hanged, has thrown himover utterly and has written to him to say that she has a husbandalready in the Bermuda Dockyard, so that there is really no tie betweenthem. I think that that bit of news has consoled young McCarthy for allthat he has suffered."
"But if he is innocent, who has done it?"
"Ah! who? I would call your attention very particularly to two points.One is that the murdered man had an appointment with someone at thepool, and that the someone could not have been his son, for his son wasaway, and he did not know when he would return. The second is that themurdered man was heard to cry ‘Cooee!’ before he knew that his son hadreturned. Those are the crucial points upon which the case depends. Andnow let us talk about George Meredith, if you please, and we shallleave all minor matters until to-morrow."
"There is serious news this morning,"
"It is saidthat Mr. Turner, of the Hall, is so ill that his life is despaired of."
"An elderly man, I presume?"
"About sixty; but his constitution has been shattered by his lifeabroad, and he has been in failing health for some time. This businesshas had a very bad effect upon him. He was an old friend of McCarthy’s,and, I may add, a great benefactor to him, for I have learned that hegave him Hatherley Farm rent free."
"Indeed! That is interesting,"
"Oh, yes! In a hundred other ways he has helped him. Everybody abouthere speaks of his kindness to him."
"Really! Does it not strike you as a little singular that thisMcCarthy, who appears to have had little of his own, and to have beenunder such obligations to Turner, should still talk of marrying his sonto Turner’s daughter, who is, presumably, heiress to the estate, andthat in such a very cocksure manner, as if it were merely a case of aproposal and all else would follow? It is the more strange, since weknow that Turner himself was averse to the idea. The daughter told usas much. Do you not deduce something from that?"
"We have got to the deductions and the inferences,"
"I find it hard enough to tackle facts, Holmes, withoutflying away after theories and fancies."
"You are right,"
"you do find it very hard totackle the facts."
"Anyhow, I have grasped one fact which you seem to find it difficult toget hold of,"
"And that is—"
"That McCarthy senior met his death from McCarthy junior and that alltheories to the contrary are the merest moonshine."
"Well, moonshine is a brighter thing than fog,"
"But I am very much mistaken if this is not Hatherley Farm upon theleft."
"Yes, that is it."
"What did you go into the pool for?"
"I fished about with a rake. I thought there might be some weapon orother trace. But how on earth—"
"Oh, tut, tut! I have no time! That left foot of yours with its inwardtwist is all over the place. A mole could trace it, and there itvanishes among the reeds. Oh, how simple it would all have been had Ibeen here before they came like a herd of buffalo and wallowed all overit. Here is where the party with the lodge-keeper came, and they havecovered all tracks for six or eight feet round the body. But here arethree separate tracks of the same feet."
"These are young McCarthy’s feet. Twicehe was walking, and once he ran swiftly, so that the soles are deeplymarked and the heels hardly visible. That bears out his story. He ranwhen he saw his father on the ground. Then here are the father’s feetas he paced up and down. What is this, then? It is the butt-end of thegun as the son stood listening. And this? Ha, ha! What have we here?Tiptoes! tiptoes! Square, too, quite unusual boots! They come, they go,they come again—of course that was for the cloak. Now where did theycome from?"
"It has been a case of considerable interest,"
"I fancy that this grey house on the right mustbe the lodge. I think that I will go in and have a word with Moran, andperhaps write a little note. Having done that, we may drive back to ourluncheon. You may walk to the cab, and I shall be with you presently."
"This may interest you, Lestrade,"
"Themurder was done with it."
"I see no marks."
"There are none."
"How do you know, then?"
"The grass was growing under it. It had only lain there a few days.There was no sign of a place whence it had been taken. It correspondswith the injuries. There is no sign of any other weapon."
"And the murderer?"
"Is a tall man, left-handed, limps with the right leg, wearsthick-soled shooting-boots and a grey cloak, smokes Indian cigars, usesa cigar-holder, and carries a blunt pen-knife in his pocket. There areseveral other indications, but these may be enough to aid us in oursearch."
"I am afraid that I am still a sceptic,"
"Theories are all very well, but we have to deal with a hard-headedBritish jury."
"_Nous verrons_,"
"You work your own method,and I shall work mine. I shall be busy this afternoon, and shallprobably return to London by the evening train."
"And leave your case unfinished?"
"No, finished."
"But the mystery?"
"It is solved."
"Who was the criminal, then?"
"The gentleman I describe."
"But who is he?"
"Surely it would not be difficult to find out. This is not such apopulous neighbourhood."
"I am a practical man,"
"andI really cannot undertake to go about the country looking for aleft-handed gentleman with a game leg. I should become thelaughing-stock of Scotland Yard."
"All right,"
"I have given you the chance. Hereare your lodgings. Good-bye. I shall drop you a line before I leave."
"Look here, Watson,"
"just sit downin this chair and let me preach to you for a little. I don’t know quitewhat to do, and I should value your advice. Light a cigar and let meexpound."
"Pray do so."
"Well, now, in considering this case there are two points about youngMcCarthy’s narrative which struck us both instantly, although theyimpressed me in his favour and you against him. One was the fact thathis father should, according to his account, cry ‘Cooee!’ before seeinghim. The other was his singular dying reference to a rat. He mumbledseveral words, you understand, but that was all that caught the son’sear. Now from this double point our research must commence, and we willbegin it by presuming that what the lad says is absolutely true."
"What of this ‘Cooee!’ then?"
"Well, obviously it could not have been meant for the son. The son, asfar as he knew, was in Bristol. It was mere chance that he was withinearshot. The ‘Cooee!’ was meant to attract the attention of whoever itwas that he had the appointment with. But ‘Cooee’ is a distinctlyAustralian cry, and one which is used between Australians. There is astrong presumption that the person whom McCarthy expected to meet himat Boscombe Pool was someone who had been in Australia."
"What of the rat, then?"
"This is a map of the Colony of Victoria,"
"I wired to Bristol for it last night."
"What do you read?"
"ARAT,"
"And now?"
"BALLARAT."
"Quite so. That was the word the man uttered, and of which his son onlycaught the last two syllables. He was trying to utter the name of hismurderer. So and so, of Ballarat."
"It is wonderful!"
"It is obvious. And now, you see, I had narrowed the field downconsiderably. The possession of a grey garment was a third point which,granting the son’s statement to be correct, was a certainty. We havecome now out of mere vagueness to the definite conception of anAustralian from Ballarat with a grey cloak."
"Certainly."
"And one who was at home in the district, for the pool can only beapproached by the farm or by the estate, where strangers could hardlywander."
"Quite so."
"Then comes our expedition of to-day. By an examination of the ground Igained the trifling details which I gave to that imbecile Lestrade, asto the personality of the criminal."
"But how did you gain them?"
"You know my method. It is founded upon the observation of trifles."
"His height I know that you might roughly judge from the length of hisstride. His boots, too, might be told from their traces."
"Yes, they were peculiar boots."
"But his lameness?"
"The impression of his right foot was always less distinct than hisleft. He put less weight upon it. Why? Because he limped—he was lame."
"But his left-handedness."
"You were yourself struck by the nature of the injury as recorded bythe surgeon at the inquest. The blow was struck from immediatelybehind, and yet was upon the left side. Now, how can that be unless itwere by a left-handed man? He had stood behind that tree during theinterview between the father and son. He had even smoked there. I foundthe ash of a cigar, which my special knowledge of tobacco ashes enablesme to pronounce as an Indian cigar. I have, as you know, devoted someattention to this, and written a little monograph on the ashes of 140different varieties of pipe, cigar, and cigarette tobacco. Having foundthe ash, I then looked round and discovered the stump among the mosswhere he had tossed it. It was an Indian cigar, of the variety whichare rolled in Rotterdam."
"And the cigar-holder?"
"I could see that the end had not been in his mouth. Therefore he useda holder. The tip had been cut off, not bitten off, but the cut was nota clean one, so I deduced a blunt pen-knife."
"Holmes,"
"you have drawn a net round this man from which hecannot escape, and you have saved an innocent human life as truly as ifyou had cut the cord which was hanging him. I see the direction inwhich all this points. The culprit is—"
"Mr. John Turner,"
"Pray sit down on the sofa,"
"You had my note?"
"Yes, the lodge-keeper brought it up. You said that you wished to seeme here to avoid scandal."
"I thought people would talk if I went to the Hall."
"And why did you wish to see me?"
"Yes,"
"It isso. I know all about McCarthy."
"God help me!"
"But Iwould not have let the young man come to harm. I give you my word thatI would have spoken out if it went against him at the Assizes."
"I am glad to hear you say so,"
"I would have spoken now had it not been for my dear girl. It wouldbreak her heart—it will break her heart when she hears that I amarrested."
"It may not come to that,"
"What?"
"I am no official agent. I understand that it was your daughter whorequired my presence here, and I am acting in her interests. YoungMcCarthy must be got off, however."
"I am a dying man,"
"I have had diabetes for years. Mydoctor says it is a question whether I shall live a month. Yet I wouldrather die under my own roof than in a gaol."
"Just tell us the truth,"
"I shalljot down the facts. You will sign it, and Watson here can witness it.Then I could produce your confession at the last extremity to saveyoung McCarthy. I promise you that I shall not use it unless it isabsolutely needed."
"It’s as well,"
"When I went down there I found him talking with his son, so I smoked acigar and waited behind a tree until he should be alone. But as Ilistened to his talk all that was black and bitter in me seemed to comeuppermost. He was urging his son to marry my daughter with as littleregard for what she might think as if she were a slut from off thestreets. It drove me mad to think that I and all that I held most dearshould be in the power of such a man as this. Could I not snap thebond? I was already a dying and a desperate man. Though clear of mindand fairly strong of limb, I knew that my own fate was sealed. But mymemory and my girl! Both could be saved if I could but silence thatfoul tongue. I did it, Mr. Holmes. I would do it again. Deeply as Ihave sinned, I have led a life of martyrdom to atone for it. But thatmy girl should be entangled in the same meshes which held me was morethan I could suffer. I struck him down with no more compunction than ifhe had been some foul and venomous beast. His cry brought back his son;but I had gained the cover of the wood, though I was forced to go backto fetch the cloak which I had dropped in my flight. That is the truestory, gentlemen, of all that occurred."
"Well, it is not for me to judge you,"
"I pray that we maynever be exposed to such a temptation."
"I pray not, sir. And what do you intend to do?"
"In view of your health, nothing. You are yourself aware that you willsoon have to answer for your deed at a higher court than the Assizes. Iwill keep your confession, and if McCarthy is condemned I shall beforced to use it. If not, it shall never be seen by mortal eye; andyour secret, whether you be alive or dead, shall be safe with us."
"Farewell, then,"
"Your own deathbeds, whenthey come, will be the easier for the thought of the peace which youhave given to mine."
"God help us!"
"Why does fate playsuch tricks with poor, helpless worms? I never hear of such a case asthis that I do not think of Baxter’s words, and say, ‘There, but forthe grace of God, goes Sherlock Holmes.’"
"Why,"
"that was surely the bell.Who could come to-night? Some friend of yours, perhaps?"
"Except yourself I have none,"
"I do not encouragevisitors."
"A client, then?"
"If so, it is a serious case. Nothing less would bring a man out onsuch a day and at such an hour. But I take it that it is more likely tobe some crony of the landlady’s."
"Come in!"
"I owe you an apology,"
"I trust that I am not intruding. I fear that I have brought sometraces of the storm and rain into your snug chamber."
"Give me your coat and umbrella,"
"They may rest here onthe hook and will be dry presently. You have come up from thesouth-west, I see."
"Yes, from Horsham."
"That clay and chalk mixture which I see upon your toe caps is quitedistinctive."
"I have come for advice."
"That is easily got."
"And help."
"That is not always so easy."
"I have heard of you, Mr. Holmes. I heard from Major Prendergast howyou saved him in the Tankerville Club scandal."
"Ah, of course. He was wrongfully accused of cheating at cards."
"He said that you could solve anything."
"He said too much."
"That you are never beaten."
"I have been beaten four times—three times by men, and once by awoman."
"But what is that compared with the number of your successes?"
"It is true that I have been generally successful."
"Then you may be so with me."
"I beg that you will draw your chair up to the fire and favour me withsome details as to your case."
"It is no ordinary one."
"None of those which come to me are. I am the last court of appeal."
"And yet I question, sir, whether, in all your experience, you haveever listened to a more mysterious and inexplicable chain of eventsthan those which have happened in my own family."
"You fill me with interest,"
"Pray give us the essentialfacts from the commencement, and I can afterwards question you as tothose details which seem to me to be most important."
"My name,"
"Well, to come to an end of the matter, Mr. Holmes, and not to abuseyour patience, there came a night when he made one of those drunkensallies from which he never came back. We found him, when we went tosearch for him, face downward in a little green-scummed pool, which layat the foot of the garden. There was no sign of any violence, and thewater was but two feet deep, so that the jury, having regard to hisknown eccentricity, brought in a verdict of ‘suicide.’ But I, who knewhow he winced from the very thought of death, had much ado to persuademyself that he had gone out of his way to meet it. The matter passed,however, and my father entered into possession of the estate, and ofsome £ 14,000, which lay to his credit at the bank."
"One moment,"
"your statement is, I foresee, one ofthe most remarkable to which I have ever listened. Let me have the dateof the reception by your uncle of the letter, and the date of hissupposed suicide."
"The letter arrived on March 10, 1883. His death was seven weeks later,upon the night of May 2nd."
"Thank you. Pray proceed."
"It was in January, ’85, that my poor father met his end, and two yearsand eight months have elapsed since then. During that time I have livedhappily at Horsham, and I had begun to hope that this curse had passedaway from the family, and that it had ended with the last generation. Ihad begun to take comfort too soon, however; yesterday morning the blowfell in the very shape in which it had come upon my father."
"This is the envelope,"
"The postmark is London—easterndivision. Within are the very words which were upon my father’s lastmessage: ‘K. K. K.’; and then ‘Put the papers on the sundial.’"
"What have you done?"
"Nothing."
"Nothing?"
"To tell the truth"
"I havefelt helpless. I have felt like one of those poor rabbits when thesnake is writhing towards it. I seem to be in the grasp of someresistless, inexorable evil, which no foresight and no precautions canguard against."
"Tut! tut!"
"You must act, man, or you are lost.Nothing but energy can save you. This is no time for despair."
"I have seen the police."
"Ah!"
"But they listened to my story with a smile. I am convinced that theinspector has formed the opinion that the letters are all practicaljokes, and that the deaths of my relations were really accidents, asthe jury stated, and were not to be connected with the warnings."
"Incredible imbecility!"
"They have, however, allowed me a policeman, who may remain in thehouse with me."
"Has he come with you to-night?"
"No. His orders were to stay in the house."
"Why did you come to me?"
"and, above all, why did you notcome at once?"
"I did not know. It was only to-day that I spoke to Major Prendergastabout my troubles and was advised by him to come to you."
"It is really two days since you had the letter. We should have actedbefore this. You have no further evidence, I suppose, than that whichyou have placed before us—no suggestive detail which might help us?"
"There is one thing,"
"I have some remembrance,"
"thaton the day when my uncle burned the papers I observed that the small,unburned margins which lay amid the ashes were of this particularcolour. I found this single sheet upon the floor of his room, and I aminclined to think that it may be one of the papers which has, perhaps,fluttered out from among the others, and in that way has escapeddestruction. Beyond the mention of pips, I do not see that it helps usmuch. I think myself that it is a page from some private diary. Thewriting is undoubtedly my uncle’s."
"March, 1869,"
"12th. Visited Paramore. All well."
"Thank you!"
"And now you must on no account lose another instant. Wecannot spare time even to discuss what you have told me. You must gethome instantly and act."
"What shall I do?"
"There is but one thing to do. It must be done at once. You must putthis piece of paper which you have shown us into the brass box whichyou have described. You must also put in a note to say that all theother papers were burned by your uncle, and that this is the only onewhich remains. You must assert that in such words as will carryconviction with them. Having done this, you must at once put the boxout upon the sundial, as directed. Do you understand?"
"Entirely."
"Do not think of revenge, or anything of the sort, at present. I thinkthat we may gain that by means of the law; but we have our web toweave, while theirs is already woven. The first consideration is toremove the pressing danger which threatens you. The second is to clearup the mystery and to punish the guilty parties."
"I thank you,"
"You have given me fresh life and hope. I shall certainly do as youadvise."
"Do not lose an instant. And, above all, take care of yourself in themeanwhile, for I do not think that there can be a doubt that you arethreatened by a very real and imminent danger. How do you go back?"
"By train from Waterloo."
"It is not yet nine. The streets will be crowded, so I trust that youmay be in safety. And yet you cannot guard yourself too closely."
"I am armed."
"That is well. To-morrow I shall set to work upon your case."
"I shall see you at Horsham, then?"
"No, your secret lies in London. It is there that I shall seek it."
"Then I shall call upon you in a day, or in two days, with news as tothe box and the papers. I shall take your advice in every particular."
"I think, Watson,"
"that of all our cases we havehad none more fantastic than this."
"Save, perhaps, the Sign of Four."
"Well, yes. Save, perhaps, that. And yet this John Openshaw seems to meto be walking amid even greater perils than did the Sholtos."
"But have you,"
"formed any definite conception as to whatthese perils are?"
"There can be no question as to their nature,"
"Then what are they? Who is this K. K. K., and why does he pursue thisunhappy family?"
"The ideal reasoner,"
"would, when he had once been shown a single fact in all itsbearings, deduce from it not only all the chain of events which led upto it but also all the results which would follow from it. As Cuviercould correctly describe a whole animal by the contemplation of asingle bone, so the observer who has thoroughly understood one link ina series of incidents should be able to accurately state all the otherones, both before and after. We have not yet grasped the results whichthe reason alone can attain to. Problems may be solved in the studywhich have baffled all those who have sought a solution by the aid oftheir senses. To carry the art, however, to its highest pitch, it isnecessary that the reasoner should be able to utilise all the factswhich have come to his knowledge; and this in itself implies, as youwill readily see, a possession of all knowledge, which, even in thesedays of free education and encyclopædias, is a somewhat rareaccomplishment. It is not so impossible, however, that a man shouldpossess all knowledge which is likely to be useful to him in his work,and this I have endeavoured in my case to do. If I remember rightly,you on one occasion, in the early days of our friendship, defined mylimits in a very precise fashion."
"Yes,"
"It was a singular document. Philosophy,astronomy, and politics were marked at zero, I remember. Botanyvariable, geology profound as regards the mud-stains from any regionwithin fifty miles of town, chemistry eccentric, anatomy unsystematic,sensational literature and crime records unique, violin-player, boxer,swordsman, lawyer, and self-poisoner by cocaine and tobacco. Those, Ithink, were the main points of my analysis."
"Well,"
"I say now, as I saidthen, that a man should keep his little brain-attic stocked with allthe furniture that he is likely to use, and the rest he can put away inthe lumber-room of his library, where he can get it if he wants it.Now, for such a case as the one which has been submitted to usto-night, we need certainly to muster all our resources. Kindly hand medown the letter K of the _American Encyclopædia_ which stands upon theshelf beside you. Thank you. Now let us consider the situation and seewhat may be deduced from it. In the first place, we may start with astrong presumption that Colonel Openshaw had some very strong reasonfor leaving America. Men at his time of life do not change all theirhabits and exchange willingly the charming climate of Florida for thelonely life of an English provincial town. His extreme love of solitudein England suggests the idea that he was in fear of someone orsomething, so we may assume as a working hypothesis that it was fear ofsomeone or something which drove him from America. As to what it was hefeared, we can only deduce that by considering the formidable letterswhich were received by himself and his successors. Did you remark thepostmarks of those letters?"
"The first was from Pondicherry, the second from Dundee, and the thirdfrom London."
"From East London. What do you deduce from that?"
"They are all seaports. That the writer was on board of a ship."
"Excellent. We have already a clue. There can be no doubt that theprobability—the strong probability—is that the writer was on board of aship. And now let us consider another point. In the case ofPondicherry, seven weeks elapsed between the threat and its fulfilment,in Dundee it was only some three or four days. Does that suggestanything?"
"A greater distance to travel."
"But the letter had also a greater distance to come."
"Then I do not see the point."
"There is at least a presumption that the vessel in which the man ormen are is a sailing-ship. It looks as if they always send theirsingular warning or token before them when starting upon their mission.You see how quickly the deed followed the sign when it came fromDundee. If they had come from Pondicherry in a steamer they would havearrived almost as soon as their letter. But, as a matter of fact, sevenweeks elapsed. I think that those seven weeks represented thedifference between the mail-boat which brought the letter and thesailing vessel which brought the writer."
"It is possible."
"More than that. It is probable. And now you see the deadly urgency ofthis new case, and why I urged young Openshaw to caution. The blow hasalways fallen at the end of the time which it would take the senders totravel the distance. But this one comes from London, and therefore wecannot count upon delay."
"Good God!"
"What can it mean, this relentless persecution?"
"The papers which Openshaw carried are obviously of vital importance tothe person or persons in the sailing-ship. I think that it is quiteclear that there must be more than one of them. A single man could nothave carried out two deaths in such a way as to deceive a coroner’sjury. There must have been several in it, and they must have been menof resource and determination. Their papers they mean to have, be theholder of them who it may. In this way you see K. K. K. ceases to bethe initials of an individual and becomes the badge of a society."
"But of what society?"
"Have you never—"
"have you never heard of the Ku Klux Klan?"
"I never have."
"Here it is,"
"You will observe,"
"that thesudden breaking up of the society was coincident with the disappearanceof Openshaw from America with their papers. It may well have been causeand effect. It is no wonder that he and his family have some of themore implacable spirits upon their track. You can understand that thisregister and diary may implicate some of the first men in the South,and that there may be many who will not sleep easy at night until it isrecovered."
"Then the page we have seen—"
"Is such as we might expect. It ran, if I remember right, ‘sent thepips to A, B, and C’—that is, sent the society’s warning to them. Thenthere are successive entries that A and B cleared, or left the country,and finally that C was visited, with, I fear, a sinister result for C.Well, I think, Doctor, that we may let some light into this dark place,and I believe that the only chance young Openshaw has in the meantimeis to do what I have told him. There is nothing more to be said or tobe done to-night, so hand me over my violin and let us try to forgetfor half an hour the miserable weather and the still more miserableways of our fellow men."
"You will excuse me for not waiting for you,"
"I have, Iforesee, a very busy day before me in looking into this case of youngOpenshaw’s."
"What steps will you take?"
"It will very much depend upon the results of my first inquiries. I mayhave to go down to Horsham, after all."
"You will not go there first?"
"No, I shall commence with the City. Just ring the bell and the maidwill bring up your coffee."
"Holmes,"
"you are too late."
"Ah!"
"I feared as much. How was itdone?"
"‘Between nine and ten last night Police-Constable Cook, of the HDivision, on duty near Waterloo Bridge, heard a cry for help and asplash in the water. The night, however, was extremely dark and stormy,so that, in spite of the help of several passers-by, it was quiteimpossible to effect a rescue. The alarm, however, was given, and, bythe aid of the water-police, the body was eventually recovered. Itproved to be that of a young gentleman whose name, as it appears froman envelope which was found in his pocket, was John Openshaw, and whoseresidence is near Horsham. It is conjectured that he may have beenhurrying down to catch the last train from Waterloo Station, and thatin his haste and the extreme darkness he missed his path and walkedover the edge of one of the small landing-places for river steamboats.The body exhibited no traces of violence, and there can be no doubtthat the deceased had been the victim of an unfortunate accident, whichshould have the effect of calling the attention of the authorities tothe condition of the riverside landing-stages.’"
"That hurts my pride, Watson,"
"It is a petty feeling,no doubt, but it hurts my pride. It becomes a personal matter with menow, and, if God sends me health, I shall set my hand upon this gang.That he should come to me for help, and that I should send him away tohis death—!"
"They must be cunning devils,"
"How could theyhave decoyed him down there? The Embankment is not on the direct lineto the station. The bridge, no doubt, was too crowded, even on such anight, for their purpose. Well, Watson, we shall see who will win inthe long run. I am going out now!"
"To the police?"
"No; I shall be my own police. When I have spun the web they may takethe flies, but not before."
"You are hungry,"
"Starving. It had escaped my memory. I have had nothing sincebreakfast."
"Nothing?"
"Not a bite. I had no time to think of it."
"And how have you succeeded?"
"Well."
"You have a clue?"
"I have them in the hollow of my hand. Young Openshaw shall not longremain unavenged. Why, Watson, let us put their own devilish trade-markupon them. It is well thought of!"
"What do you mean?"
"S. H. for J.O."
"Captain James Calhoun,Barque _Lone Star_, Savannah, Georgia."
"That will await him when he enters port,"
"It maygive him a sleepless night. He will find it as sure a precursor of hisfate as Openshaw did before him."
"And who is this Captain Calhoun?"
"The leader of the gang. I shall have the others, but he first."
"How did you trace it, then?"
"I have spent the whole day,"
"over Lloyd’s registers andfiles of the old papers, following the future career of every vesselwhich touched at Pondicherry in January and February in ’83. There werethirty-six ships of fair tonnage which were reported there during thosemonths. Of these, one, the _Lone Star_, instantly attracted myattention, since, although it was reported as having cleared fromLondon, the name is that which is given to one of the states of theUnion."
"Texas, I think."
"I was not and am not sure which; but I knew that the ship must have anAmerican origin."
"What then?"
"I searched the Dundee records, and when I found that the barque _LoneStar_ was there in January, ’85, my suspicion became a certainty. Ithen inquired as to the vessels which lay at present in the port ofLondon."
"Yes?"
"The _Lone Star_ had arrived here last week. I went down to the AlbertDock and found that she had been taken down the river by the early tidethis morning, homeward bound to Savannah. I wired to Gravesend andlearned that she had passed some time ago, and as the wind is easterlyI have no doubt that she is now past the Goodwins and not very far fromthe Isle of Wight."
"What will you do, then?"
"Oh, I have my hand upon him. He and the two mates, are as I learn, theonly native-born Americans in the ship. The others are Finns andGermans. I know, also, that they were all three away from the ship lastnight. I had it from the stevedore who has been loading their cargo. Bythe time that their sailing-ship reaches Savannah the mail-boat willhave carried this letter, and the cable will have informed the policeof Savannah that these three gentlemen are badly wanted here upon acharge of murder."
"L. S."
"A patient!"
"You’ll have to go out."
"You will excuse my calling so late,"
"Oh, I’m in such trouble!"
"I do so want a little help."
"Why,"
"it is Kate Whitney. How youstartled me, Kate! I had not an idea who you were when you came in."
"I didn’t know what to do, so I came straight to you."
"It was very sweet of you to come. Now, you must have some wine andwater, and sit here comfortably and tell us all about it. Or should yourather that I sent James off to bed?"
"Oh, no, no! I want the doctor’s advice and help, too. It’s about Isa.He has not been home for two days. I am so frightened about him!"
"Thank you. I have not come to stay,"
"There is a friend ofmine here, Mr. Isa Whitney, and I wish to speak with him."
"My God! It’s Watson,"
"I say, Watson, what o’clock is it?"
"Nearly eleven."
"Of what day?"
"Of Friday, June 19th."
"Good heavens! I thought it was Wednesday. It is Wednesday. What d’youwant to frighten a chap for?"
"I tell you that it is Friday, man. Your wife has been waiting this twodays for you. You should be ashamed of yourself!"
"So I am. But you’ve got mixed, Watson, for I have only been here a fewhours, three pipes, four pipes—I forget how many. But I’ll go home withyou. I wouldn’t frighten Kate—poor little Kate. Give me your hand! Haveyou a cab?"
"Yes, I have one waiting."
"Then I shall go in it. But I must owe something. Find what I owe,Watson. I am all off colour. I can do nothing for myself."
"Walk past me, and then look back at me."
"Holmes!"
"what on earth are you doing in this den?"
"As low as you can,"
"I have excellent ears. If you wouldhave the great kindness to get rid of that sottish friend of yours Ishould be exceedingly glad to have a little talk with you."
"I have a cab outside."
"Then pray send him home in it. You may safely trust him, for heappears to be too limp to get into any mischief. I should recommend youalso to send a note by the cabman to your wife to say that you havethrown in your lot with me. If you will wait outside, I shall be withyou in five minutes."
"I suppose, Watson,"
"that you imagine that I have addedopium-smoking to cocaine injections, and all the other littleweaknesses on which you have favoured me with your medical views."
"I was certainly surprised to find you there."
"But not more so than I to find you."
"I came to find a friend."
"And I to find an enemy."
"An enemy?"
"Yes; one of my natural enemies, or, shall I say, my natural prey.Briefly, Watson, I am in the midst of a very remarkable inquiry, and Ihave hoped to find a clue in the incoherent ramblings of these sots, asI have done before now. Had I been recognised in that den my life wouldnot have been worth an hour’s purchase; for I have used it before nowfor my own purposes, and the rascally Lascar who runs it has sworn tohave vengeance upon me. There is a trap-door at the back of thatbuilding, near the corner of Paul’s Wharf, which could tell somestrange tales of what has passed through it upon the moonless nights."
"What! You do not mean bodies?"
"Ay, bodies, Watson. We should be rich men if we had £ 1000 for everypoor devil who has been done to death in that den. It is the vilestmurder-trap on the whole riverside, and I fear that Neville St. Clairhas entered it never to leave it more. But our trap should be here."
"Now, Watson,"
"You’ll come with me, won’t you?"
"If I can be of use."
"Oh, a trusty comrade is always of use; and a chronicler still more so.My room at The Cedars is a double-bedded one."
"The Cedars?"
"Yes; that is Mr. St. Clair’s house. I am staying there while I conductthe inquiry."
"Where is it, then?"
"Near Lee, in Kent. We have a seven-mile drive before us."
"But I am all in the dark."
"Of course you are. You’ll know all about it presently. Jump up here.All right, John; we shall not need you. Here’s half a crown. Look outfor me to-morrow, about eleven. Give her her head. So long, then!"
"You have a grand gift of silence, Watson,"
"It makes youquite invaluable as a companion. ’Pon my word, it is a great thing forme to have someone to talk to, for my own thoughts are notover-pleasant. I was wondering what I should say to this dear littlewoman to-night when she meets me at the door."
"You forget that I know nothing about it."
"I shall just have time to tell you the facts of the case before we getto Lee. It seems absurdly simple, and yet, somehow I can get nothing togo upon. There’s plenty of thread, no doubt, but I can’t get the end ofit into my hand. Now, I’ll state the case clearly and concisely to you,Watson, and maybe you can see a spark where all is dark to me."
"Proceed, then."
"Last Monday Mr. Neville St. Clair went into town rather earlier thanusual, remarking before he started that he had two importantcommissions to perform, and that he would bring his little boy home abox of bricks. Now, by the merest chance, his wife received a telegramupon this same Monday, very shortly after his departure, to the effectthat a small parcel of considerable value which she had been expectingwas waiting for her at the offices of the Aberdeen Shipping Company.Now, if you are well up in your London, you will know that the officeof the company is in Fresno Street, which branches out of Upper SwandamLane, where you found me to-night. Mrs. St. Clair had her lunch,started for the City, did some shopping, proceeded to the company’soffice, got her packet, and found herself at exactly 4:35 walkingthrough Swandam Lane on her way back to the station. Have you followedme so far?"
"It is very clear."
"So much for the Lascar manager. Now for the sinister cripple who livesupon the second floor of the opium den, and who was certainly the lasthuman being whose eyes rested upon Neville St. Clair. His name is HughBoone, and his hideous face is one which is familiar to every man whogoes much to the City. He is a professional beggar, though in order toavoid the police regulations he pretends to a small trade in waxvestas. Some little distance down Threadneedle Street, upon theleft-hand side, there is, as you may have remarked, a small angle inthe wall. Here it is that this creature takes his daily seat,cross-legged with his tiny stock of matches on his lap, and as he is apiteous spectacle a small rain of charity descends into the greasyleather cap which lies upon the pavement beside him. I have watched thefellow more than once before ever I thought of making his professionalacquaintance, and I have been surprised at the harvest which he hasreaped in a short time. His appearance, you see, is so remarkable thatno one can pass him without observing him. A shock of orange hair, apale face disfigured by a horrible scar, which, by its contraction, hasturned up the outer edge of his upper lip, a bulldog chin, and a pairof very penetrating dark eyes, which present a singular contrast to thecolour of his hair, all mark him out from amid the common crowd ofmendicants and so, too, does his wit, for he is ever ready with a replyto any piece of chaff which may be thrown at him by the passers-by.This is the man whom we now learn to have been the lodger at the opiumden, and to have been the last man to see the gentleman of whom we arein quest."
"But a cripple!"
"What could he have done single-handed againsta man in the prime of life?"
"He is a cripple in the sense that he walks with a limp; but in otherrespects he appears to be a powerful and well-nurtured man. Surely yourmedical experience would tell you, Watson, that weakness in one limb isoften compensated for by exceptional strength in the others."
"Pray continue your narrative."
"And it did, though they hardly found upon the mud-bank what they hadfeared to find. It was Neville St. Clair’s coat, and not Neville St.Clair, which lay uncovered as the tide receded. And what do you thinkthey found in the pockets?"
"I cannot imagine."
"No, I don’t think you would guess. Every pocket stuffed with penniesand half-pennies—421 pennies and 270 half-pennies. It was no wonderthat it had not been swept away by the tide. But a human body is adifferent matter. There is a fierce eddy between the wharf and thehouse. It seemed likely enough that the weighted coat had remained whenthe stripped body had been sucked away into the river."
"But I understand that all the other clothes were found in the room.Would the body be dressed in a coat alone?"
"No, sir, but the facts might be met speciously enough. Suppose thatthis man Boone had thrust Neville St. Clair through the window, thereis no human eye which could have seen the deed. What would he do then?It would of course instantly strike him that he must get rid of thetell-tale garments. He would seize the coat, then, and be in the act ofthrowing it out, when it would occur to him that it would swim and notsink. He has little time, for he has heard the scuffle downstairs whenthe wife tried to force her way up, and perhaps he has already heardfrom his Lascar confederate that the police are hurrying up the street.There is not an instant to be lost. He rushes to some secret hoard,where he has accumulated the fruits of his beggary, and he stuffs allthe coins upon which he can lay his hands into the pockets to make sureof the coat’s sinking. He throws it out, and would have done the samewith the other garments had not he heard the rush of steps below, andonly just had time to close the window when the police appeared."
"It certainly sounds feasible."
"Well, we will take it as a working hypothesis for want of a better.Boone, as I have told you, was arrested and taken to the station, butit could not be shown that there had ever before been anything againsthim. He had for years been known as a professional beggar, but his lifeappeared to have been a very quiet and innocent one. There the matterstands at present, and the questions which have to be solved—whatNeville St. Clair was doing in the opium den, what happened to him whenthere, where is he now, and what Hugh Boone had to do with hisdisappearance—are all as far from a solution as ever. I confess that Icannot recall any case within my experience which looked at the firstglance so simple and yet which presented such difficulties."
"We are on the outskirts of Lee,"
"We have touchedon three English counties in our short drive, starting in Middlesex,passing over an angle of Surrey, and ending in Kent. See that lightamong the trees? That is The Cedars, and beside that lamp sits a womanwhose anxious ears have already, I have little doubt, caught the clinkof our horse’s feet."
"But why are you not conducting the case from Baker Street?"
"Because there are many inquiries which must be made out here. Mrs. St.Clair has most kindly put two rooms at my disposal, and you may restassured that she will have nothing but a welcome for my friend andcolleague. I hate to meet her, Watson, when I have no news of herhusband. Here we are. Whoa, there, whoa!"
"Well?"
"well?"
"No good news?"
"None."
"No bad?"
"No."
"Thank God for that. But come in. You must be weary, for you have had along day."
"This is my friend, Dr. Watson. He has been of most vital use to me inseveral of my cases, and a lucky chance has made it possible for me tobring him out and associate him with this investigation."
"I am delighted to see you,"
"Youwill, I am sure, forgive anything that may be wanting in ourarrangements, when you consider the blow which has come so suddenlyupon us."
"My dear madam,"
"I am an old campaigner, and if I were not Ican very well see that no apology is needed. If I can be of anyassistance, either to you or to my friend here, I shall be indeedhappy."
"Now, Mr. Sherlock Holmes,"
"I should very much like to ask you one or two plain questions, towhich I beg that you will give a plain answer."
"Certainly, madam."
"Do not trouble about my feelings. I am not hysterical, nor given tofainting. I simply wish to hear your real, real opinion."
"Upon what point?"
"In your heart of hearts, do you think that Neville is alive?"
"Frankly,now!"
"Frankly, then, madam, I do not."
"You think that he is dead?"
"I do."
"Murdered?"
"I don’t say that. Perhaps."
"And on what day did he meet his death?"
"On Monday."
"Then perhaps, Mr. Holmes, you will be good enough to explain how it isthat I have received a letter from him to-day."
"What!"
"Yes, to-day."
"May I see it?"
"Certainly."
"Coarse writing,"
"Surely this is not your husband’swriting, madam."
"No, but the enclosure is."
"I perceive also that whoever addressed the envelope had to go andinquire as to the address."
"How can you tell that?"
"The name, you see, is in perfectly black ink, which has dried itself.The rest is of the greyish colour, which shows that blotting-paper hasbeen used. If it had been written straight off, and then blotted, nonewould be of a deep black shade. This man has written the name, andthere has then been a pause before he wrote the address, which can onlymean that he was not familiar with it. It is, of course, a trifle, butthere is nothing so important as trifles. Let us now see the letter.Ha! there has been an enclosure here!"
"Yes, there was a ring. His signet-ring."
"And you are sure that this is your husband’s hand?"
"One of his hands."
"One?"
"His hand when he wrote hurriedly. It is very unlike his usual writing,and yet I know it well."
"‘Dearest do not be frightened. All will come well. There is a hugeerror which it may take some little time to rectify. Wait inpatience.—NEVILLE.’ Written in pencil upon the fly-leaf of a book,octavo size, no water-mark. Hum! Posted to-day in Gravesend by a manwith a dirty thumb. Ha! And the flap has been gummed, if I am not verymuch in error, by a person who had been chewing tobacco. And you haveno doubt that it is your husband’s hand, madam?"
"None. Neville wrote those words."
"And they were posted to-day at Gravesend. Well, Mrs. St. Clair, theclouds lighten, though I should not venture to say that the danger isover."
"But he must be alive, Mr. Holmes."
"Unless this is a clever forgery to put us on the wrong scent. Thering, after all, proves nothing. It may have been taken from him."
"No, no; it is, it is his very own writing!"
"Very well. It may, however, have been written on Monday and onlyposted to-day."
"That is possible."
"If so, much may have happened between."
"Oh, you must not discourage me, Mr. Holmes. I know that all is wellwith him. There is so keen a sympathy between us that I should know ifevil came upon him. On the very day that I saw him last he cut himselfin the bedroom, and yet I in the dining-room rushed upstairs instantlywith the utmost certainty that something had happened. Do you thinkthat I would respond to such a trifle and yet be ignorant of hisdeath?"
"I have seen too much not to know that the impression of a woman may bemore valuable than the conclusion of an analytical reasoner. And inthis letter you certainly have a very strong piece of evidence tocorroborate your view. But if your husband is alive and able to writeletters, why should he remain away from you?"
"I cannot imagine. It is unthinkable."
"And on Monday he made no remarks before leaving you?"
"No."
"And you were surprised to see him in Swandam Lane?"
"Very much so."
"Was the window open?"
"Yes."
"Then he might have called to you?"
"He might."
"He only, as I understand, gave an inarticulate cry?"
"Yes."
"A call for help, you thought?"
"Yes. He waved his hands."
"But it might have been a cry of surprise. Astonishment at theunexpected sight of you might cause him to throw up his hands?"
"It is possible."
"And you thought he was pulled back?"
"He disappeared so suddenly."
"He might have leaped back. You did not see anyone else in the room?"
"No, but this horrible man confessed to having been there, and theLascar was at the foot of the stairs."
"Quite so. Your husband, as far as you could see, had his ordinaryclothes on?"
"But without his collar or tie. I distinctly saw his bare throat."
"Had he ever spoken of Swandam Lane?"
"Never."
"Had he ever showed any signs of having taken opium?"
"Never."
"Thank you, Mrs. St. Clair. Those are the principal points about whichI wished to be absolutely clear. We shall now have a little supper andthen retire, for we may have a very busy day to-morrow."
"Awake, Watson?"
"Yes."
"Game for a morning drive?"
"Certainly."
"Then dress. No one is stirring yet, but I know where the stable-boysleeps, and we shall soon have the trap out."
"I want to test a little theory of mine,"
"I think, Watson, that you are now standing in the presence ofone of the most absolute fools in Europe. I deserve to be kicked fromhere to Charing Cross. But I think I have the key of the affair now."
"And where is it?"
"In the bathroom,"
"Oh, yes, I am not joking,"
"I have just been there, andI have taken it out, and I have got it in this Gladstone bag. Come on,my boy, and we shall see whether it will not fit the lock."
"It has been in some points a singular case,"
"I confess that I have been as blind as a mole,but it is better to learn wisdom late than never to learn it at all."
"Who is on duty?"
"Inspector Bradstreet, sir."
"Ah, Bradstreet, how are you?"
"I wish tohave a quiet word with you, Bradstreet."
"Certainly, Mr. Holmes. Step into my room here."
"What can I do for you, Mr. Holmes?"
"I called about that beggarman, Boone—the one who was charged withbeing concerned in the disappearance of Mr. Neville St. Clair, of Lee."
"Yes. He was brought up and remanded for further inquiries."
"So I heard. You have him here?"
"In the cells."
"Is he quiet?"
"Oh, he gives no trouble. But he is a dirty scoundrel."
"Dirty?"
"Yes, it is all we can do to make him wash his hands, and his face isas black as a tinker’s. Well, when once his case has been settled, hewill have a regular prison bath; and I think, if you saw him, you wouldagree with me that he needed it."
"I should like to see him very much."
"Would you? That is easily done. Come this way. You can leave yourbag."
"No, I think that I’ll take it."
"Very good. Come this way, if you please."
"The third on the right is his,"
"Here it is!"
"He is asleep,"
"You can see him very well."
"He’s a beauty, isn’t he?"
"He certainly needs a wash,"
"I had an idea that hemight, and I took the liberty of bringing the tools with me."
"He! he! You are a funny one,"
"Now, if you will have the great goodness to open that door veryquietly, we will soon make him cut a much more respectable figure."
"Well, I don’t know why not,"
"He doesn’t look acredit to the Bow Street cells, does he?"
"Let me introduce you,"
"to Mr. Neville St. Clair, of Lee,in the county of Kent."
"Great heavens!"
"it is, indeed, the missing man.I know him from the photograph."
"Be it so,"
"And pray what am I charged with?"
"With making away with Mr. Neville St.— Oh, come, you can’t be chargedwith that unless they make a case of attempted suicide of it,"
"Well, I have been twenty-seven years in theforce, but this really takes the cake."
"If I am Mr. Neville St. Clair, then it is obvious that no crime hasbeen committed, and that, therefore, I am illegally detained."
"No crime, but a very great error has been committed,"
"You would have done better to have trusted your wife."
"It was not the wife; it was the children,"
"Godhelp me, I would not have them ashamed of their father. My God! What anexposure! What can I do?"
"If you leave it to a court of law to clear the matter up,"
"of course you can hardly avoid publicity. On the other hand, if youconvince the police authorities that there is no possible case againstyou, I do not know that there is any reason that the details shouldfind their way into the papers. Inspector Bradstreet would, I am sure,make notes upon anything which you might tell us and submit it to theproper authorities. The case would then never go into court at all."
"God bless you!"
"I do not know that there is anything else for me to explain. I wasdetermined to preserve my disguise as long as possible, and hence mypreference for a dirty face. Knowing that my wife would be terriblyanxious, I slipped off my ring and confided it to the Lascar at amoment when no constable was watching me, together with a hurriedscrawl, telling her that she had no cause to fear."
"That note only reached her yesterday,"
"Good God! What a week she must have spent!"
"The police have watched this Lascar,"
"andI can quite understand that he might find it difficult to post a letterunobserved. Probably he handed it to some sailor customer of his, whoforgot all about it for some days."
"That was it,"
"I have no doubt ofit. But have you never been prosecuted for begging?"
"Many times; but what was a fine to me?"
"It must stop here, however,"
"If the police are tohush this thing up, there must be no more of Hugh Boone."
"I have sworn it by the most solemn oaths which a man can take."
"In that case I think that it is probable that no further steps may betaken. But if you are found again, then all must come out. I am sure,Mr. Holmes, that we are very much indebted to you for having clearedthe matter up. I wish I knew how you reach your results."
"I reached this one,"
"by sitting upon five pillows andconsuming an ounce of shag. I think, Watson, that if we drive to BakerStreet we shall just be in time for breakfast."
"You are engaged,"
"perhaps I interrupt you."
"Not at all. I am glad to have a friend with whom I can discuss myresults. The matter is a perfectly trivial one"
"but there are points in connection withit which are not entirely devoid of interest and even of instruction."
"I suppose,"
"that, homely asit looks, this thing has some deadly story linked on to it—that it isthe clue which will guide you in the solution of some mystery and thepunishment of some crime."
"No, no. No crime,"
"Only one of thosewhimsical little incidents which will happen when you have four millionhuman beings all jostling each other within the space of a few squaremiles. Amid the action and reaction of so dense a swarm of humanity,every possible combination of events may be expected to take place, andmany a little problem will be presented which may be striking andbizarre without being criminal. We have already had experience ofsuch."
"So much so,"
"that of the last six cases which I haveadded to my notes, three have been entirely free of any legal crime."
"Precisely. You allude to my attempt to recover the Irene Adler papers,to the singular case of Miss Mary Sutherland, and to the adventure ofthe man with the twisted lip. Well, I have no doubt that this smallmatter will fall into the same innocent category. You know Peterson,the commissionaire?"
"Yes."
"It is to him that this trophy belongs."
"It is his hat."
"No, no, he found it. Its owner is unknown. I beg that you will lookupon it not as a battered billycock but as an intellectual problem.And, first, as to how it came here. It arrived upon Christmas morning,in company with a good fat goose, which is, I have no doubt, roastingat this moment in front of Peterson’s fire. The facts are these: aboutfour o’clock on Christmas morning, Peterson, who, as you know, is avery honest fellow, was returning from some small jollification and wasmaking his way homeward down Tottenham Court Road. In front of him hesaw, in the gaslight, a tallish man, walking with a slight stagger, andcarrying a white goose slung over his shoulder. As he reached thecorner of Goodge Street, a row broke out between this stranger and alittle knot of roughs. One of the latter knocked off the man’s hat, onwhich he raised his stick to defend himself and, swinging it over hishead, smashed the shop window behind him. Peterson had rushed forwardto protect the stranger from his assailants; but the man, shocked athaving broken the window, and seeing an official-looking person inuniform rushing towards him, dropped his goose, took to his heels, andvanished amid the labyrinth of small streets which lie at the back ofTottenham Court Road. The roughs had also fled at the appearance ofPeterson, so that he was left in possession of the field of battle, andalso of the spoils of victory in the shape of this battered hat and amost unimpeachable Christmas goose."
"Which surely he restored to their owner?"
"My dear fellow, there lies the problem. It is true that ‘For Mrs.Henry Baker’ was printed upon a small card which was tied to the bird’sleft leg, and it is also true that the initials ‘H. B.’ are legibleupon the lining of this hat, but as there are some thousands of Bakers,and some hundreds of Henry Bakers in this city of ours, it is not easyto restore lost property to any one of them."
"What, then, did Peterson do?"
"He brought round both hat and goose to me on Christmas morning,knowing that even the smallest problems are of interest to me. Thegoose we retained until this morning, when there were signs that, inspite of the slight frost, it would be well that it should be eatenwithout unnecessary delay. Its finder has carried it off, therefore, tofulfil the ultimate destiny of a goose, while I continue to retain thehat of the unknown gentleman who lost his Christmas dinner."
"Did he not advertise?"
"No."
"Then, what clue could you have as to his identity?"
"Only as much as we can deduce."
"From his hat?"
"Precisely."
"But you are joking. What can you gather from this old battered felt?"
"Here is my lens. You know my methods. What can you gather yourself asto the individuality of the man who has worn this article?"
"H. B."
"I can see nothing,"
"On the contrary, Watson, you can see everything. You fail, however, toreason from what you see. You are too timid in drawing yourinferences."
"Then, pray tell me what it is that you can infer from this hat?"
"It is perhaps less suggestive than itmight have been,"
"and yet there are a few inferenceswhich are very distinct, and a few others which represent at least astrong balance of probability. That the man was highly intellectual isof course obvious upon the face of it, and also that he was fairlywell-to-do within the last three years, although he has now fallen uponevil days. He had foresight, but has less now than formerly, pointingto a moral retrogression, which, when taken with the decline of hisfortunes, seems to indicate some evil influence, probably drink, atwork upon him. This may account also for the obvious fact that his wifehas ceased to love him."
"My dear Holmes!"
"He has, however, retained some degree of self-respect,"
"He is a man who leads a sedentary life,goes out little, is out of training entirely, is middle-aged, hasgrizzled hair which he has had cut within the last few days, and whichhe anoints with lime-cream. These are the more patent facts which areto be deduced from his hat. Also, by the way, that it is extremelyimprobable that he has gas laid on in his house."
"You are certainly joking, Holmes."
"Not in the least. Is it possible that even now, when I give you theseresults, you are unable to see how they are attained?"
"I have no doubt that I am very stupid, but I must confess that I amunable to follow you. For example, how did you deduce that this man wasintellectual?"
"It is a question ofcubic capacity,"
"a man with so large a brain must havesomething in it."
"The decline of his fortunes, then?"
"This hat is three years old. These flat brims curled at the edge camein then. It is a hat of the very best quality. Look at the band ofribbed silk and the excellent lining. If this man could afford to buyso expensive a hat three years ago, and has had no hat since, then hehas assuredly gone down in the world."
"Well, that is clear enough, certainly. But how about the foresight andthe moral retrogression?"
"Here is the foresight,"
"They arenever sold upon hats. If this man ordered one, it is a sign of acertain amount of foresight, since he went out of his way to take thisprecaution against the wind. But since we see that he has broken theelastic and has not troubled to replace it, it is obvious that he hasless foresight now than formerly, which is a distinct proof of aweakening nature. On the other hand, he has endeavoured to conceal someof these stains upon the felt by daubing them with ink, which is a signthat he has not entirely lost his self-respect."
"Your reasoning is certainly plausible."
"The further points, that he is middle-aged, that his hair is grizzled,that it has been recently cut, and that he uses lime-cream, are all tobe gathered from a close examination of the lower part of the lining.The lens discloses a large number of hair-ends, clean cut by thescissors of the barber. They all appear to be adhesive, and there is adistinct odour of lime-cream. This dust, you will observe, is not thegritty, grey dust of the street but the fluffy brown dust of the house,showing that it has been hung up indoors most of the time, while themarks of moisture upon the inside are proof positive that the wearerperspired very freely, and could therefore, hardly be in the best oftraining."
"But his wife—you said that she had ceased to love him."
"This hat has not been brushed for weeks. When I see you, my dearWatson, with a week’s accumulation of dust upon your hat, and when yourwife allows you to go out in such a state, I shall fear that you alsohave been unfortunate enough to lose your wife’s affection."
"But he might be a bachelor."
"Nay, he was bringing home the goose as a peace-offering to his wife.Remember the card upon the bird’s leg."
"You have an answer to everything. But how on earth do you deduce thatthe gas is not laid on in his house?"
"One tallow stain, or even two, might come by chance; but when I see noless than five, I think that there can be little doubt that theindividual must be brought into frequent contact with burningtallow—walks upstairs at night probably with his hat in one hand and aguttering candle in the other. Anyhow, he never got tallow-stains froma gas-jet. Are you satisfied?"
"Well, it is very ingenious,"
"but since, as you saidjust now, there has been no crime committed, and no harm done save theloss of a goose, all this seems to be rather a waste of energy."
"The goose, Mr. Holmes! The goose, sir!"
"Eh? What of it, then? Has it returned to life and flapped off throughthe kitchen window?"
"See here, sir! See what my wife found in its crop!"
"By Jove, Peterson!"
"this is treasure trove indeed. I suppose you know what you have got?"
"A diamond, sir? A precious stone. It cuts into glass as though it wereputty."
"It’s more than a precious stone. It is _the_ precious stone."
"Not the Countess of Morcar’s blue carbuncle!"
"Precisely so. I ought to know its size and shape, seeing that I haveread the advertisement about it in _The Times_ every day lately. It isabsolutely unique, and its value can only be conjectured, but thereward offered of £ 1000 is certainly not within a twentieth part ofthe market price."
"A thousand pounds! Great Lord of mercy!"
"That is the reward, and I have reason to know that there aresentimental considerations in the background which would induce theCountess to part with half her fortune if she could but recover thegem."
"It was lost, if I remember aright, at the Hotel Cosmopolitan,"
"Precisely so, on December 22nd, just five days ago. John Horner, aplumber, was accused of having abstracted it from the lady’sjewel-case. The evidence against him was so strong that the case hasbeen referred to the Assizes. I have some account of the matter here, Ibelieve."
"Hotel Cosmopolitan Jewel Robbery. John Horner, 26, plumber, wasbrought up upon the charge of having upon the 22nd inst., abstractedfrom the jewel-case of the Countess of Morcar the valuable gem known asthe blue carbuncle. James Ryder, upper-attendant at the hotel, gave hisevidence to the effect that he had shown Horner up to the dressing-roomof the Countess of Morcar upon the day of the robbery in order that hemight solder the second bar of the grate, which was loose. He hadremained with Horner some little time, but had finally been calledaway. On returning, he found that Horner had disappeared, that thebureau had been forced open, and that the small morocco casket inwhich, as it afterwards transpired, the Countess was accustomed to keepher jewel, was lying empty upon the dressing-table. Ryder instantlygave the alarm, and Horner was arrested the same evening; but the stonecould not be found either upon his person or in his rooms. CatherineCusack, maid to the Countess, deposed to having heard Ryder’s cry ofdismay on discovering the robbery, and to having rushed into the room,where she found matters as described by the last witness. InspectorBradstreet, B division, gave evidence as to the arrest of Horner, whostruggled frantically, and protested his innocence in the strongestterms. Evidence of a previous conviction for robbery having been givenagainst the prisoner, the magistrate refused to deal summarily with theoffence, but referred it to the Assizes. Horner, who had shown signs ofintense emotion during the proceedings, fainted away at the conclusionand was carried out of court."
"Hum! So much for the police-court,"
"The question for us now to solve is the sequence ofevents leading from a rifled jewel-case at one end to the crop of agoose in Tottenham Court Road at the other. You see, Watson, our littledeductions have suddenly assumed a much more important and lessinnocent aspect. Here is the stone; the stone came from the goose, andthe goose came from Mr. Henry Baker, the gentleman with the bad hat andall the other characteristics with which I have bored you. So now wemust set ourselves very seriously to finding this gentleman andascertaining what part he has played in this little mystery. To dothis, we must try the simplest means first, and these lie undoubtedlyin an advertisement in all the evening papers. If this fail, I shallhave recourse to other methods."
"What will you say?"
"Give me a pencil and that slip of paper. Now, then: ‘Found at thecorner of Goodge Street, a goose and a black felt hat. Mr. Henry Bakercan have the same by applying at 6:30 this evening at 221B, BakerStreet.’ That is clear and concise."
"Very. But will he see it?"
"Well, he is sure to keep an eye on the papers, since, to a poor man,the loss was a heavy one. He was clearly so scared by his mischance inbreaking the window and by the approach of Peterson that he thought ofnothing but flight, but since then he must have bitterly regretted theimpulse which caused him to drop his bird. Then, again, theintroduction of his name will cause him to see it, for everyone whoknows him will direct his attention to it. Here you are, Peterson, rundown to the advertising agency and have this put in the eveningpapers."
"In which, sir?"
"Oh, in the _Globe_, _Star_, _Pall Mall_, _St. James’s Gazette_,_Evening News_, _Standard_, _Echo_, and any others that occur to you."
"Very well, sir. And this stone?"
"Ah, yes, I shall keep the stone. Thank you. And, I say, Peterson, justbuy a goose on your way back and leave it here with me, for we musthave one to give to this gentleman in place of the one which yourfamily is now devouring."
"It’s a bonny thing,"
"Just see how itglints and sparkles. Of course it is a nucleus and focus of crime.Every good stone is. They are the devil’s pet baits. In the larger andolder jewels every facet may stand for a bloody deed. This stone is notyet twenty years old. It was found in the banks of the Amoy River insouthern China and is remarkable in having every characteristic of thecarbuncle, save that it is blue in shade instead of ruby red. In spiteof its youth, it has already a sinister history. There have been twomurders, a vitriol-throwing, a suicide, and several robberies broughtabout for the sake of this forty-grain weight of crystallised charcoal.Who would think that so pretty a toy would be a purveyor to the gallowsand the prison? I’ll lock it up in my strong box now and drop a line tothe Countess to say that we have it."
"Do you think that this man Horner is innocent?"
"I cannot tell."
"Well, then, do you imagine that this other one, Henry Baker, hadanything to do with the matter?"
"It is, I think, much more likely that Henry Baker is an absolutelyinnocent man, who had no idea that the bird which he was carrying wasof considerably more value than if it were made of solid gold. That,however, I shall determine by a very simple test if we have an answerto our advertisement."
"And you can do nothing until then?"
"Nothing."
"In that case I shall continue my professional round. But I shall comeback in the evening at the hour you have mentioned, for I should liketo see the solution of so tangled a business."
"Very glad to see you. I dine at seven. There is a woodcock, I believe.By the way, in view of recent occurrences, perhaps I ought to ask Mrs.Hudson to examine its crop."
"Mr. Henry Baker, I believe,"
"Pray take this chair by the fire, Mr. Baker. It is acold night, and I observe that your circulation is more adapted forsummer than for winter. Ah, Watson, you have just come at the righttime. Is that your hat, Mr. Baker?"
"Yes, sir, that is undoubtedly my hat."
"We have retained these things for some days,"
"because weexpected to see an advertisement from you giving your address. I am ata loss to know now why you did not advertise."
"Shillings have not been soplentiful with me as they once were,"
"I had no doubt thatthe gang of roughs who assaulted me had carried off both my hat and thebird. I did not care to spend more money in a hopeless attempt atrecovering them."
"Very naturally. By the way, about the bird, we were compelled to eatit."
"To eat it!"
"Yes, it would have been of no use to anyone had we not done so. But Ipresume that this other goose upon the sideboard, which is about thesame weight and perfectly fresh, will answer your purpose equallywell?"
"Oh, certainly, certainly,"
"Of course, we still have the feathers, legs, crop, and so on of yourown bird, so if you wish—"
"They might be useful to me asrelics of my adventure,"
"but beyond that I can hardly seewhat use the _disjecta membra_ of my late acquaintance are going to beto me. No, sir, I think that, with your permission, I will confine myattentions to the excellent bird which I perceive upon the sideboard."
"There is your hat, then, and there your bird,"
"By the way,would it bore you to tell me where you got the other one from? I amsomewhat of a fowl fancier, and I have seldom seen a better growngoose."
"Certainly, sir,"
"There are a few of us who frequent the AlphaInn, near the Museum—we are to be found in the Museum itself during theday, you understand. This year our good host, Windigate by name,instituted a goose club, by which, on consideration of some few penceevery week, we were each to receive a bird at Christmas. My pence wereduly paid, and the rest is familiar to you. I am much indebted to you,sir, for a Scotch bonnet is fitted neither to my years nor my gravity."
"So much for Mr. Henry Baker,"
"It is quite certain that he knows nothing whatever aboutthe matter. Are you hungry, Watson?"
"Not particularly."
"Then I suggest that we turn our dinner into a supper and follow upthis clue while it is still hot."
"By all means."
"Your beer should be excellent if it is as good as your geese,"
"My geese!"
"Yes. I was speaking only half an hour ago to Mr. Henry Baker, who wasa member of your goose club."
"Ah! yes, I see. But you see, sir, them’s not _our_ geese."
"Indeed! Whose, then?"
"Well, I got the two dozen from a salesman in Covent Garden."
"Indeed? I know some of them. Which was it?"
"Breckinridge is his name."
"Ah! I don’t know him. Well, here’s your good health landlord, andprosperity to your house. Good-night."
"Now for Mr. Breckinridge,"
"Remember, Watson that though we have sohomely a thing as a goose at one end of this chain, we have at theother a man who will certainly get seven years’ penal servitude unlesswe can establish his innocence. It is possible that our inquiry may butconfirm his guilt; but, in any case, we have a line of investigationwhich has been missed by the police, and which a singular chance hasplaced in our hands. Let us follow it out to the bitter end. Faces tothe south, then, and quick march!"
"Good-evening. It’s a cold night,"
"Sold out of geese, I see,"
"Let you have five hundred to-morrow morning."
"That’s no good."
"Well, there are some on the stall with the gas-flare."
"Ah, but I was recommended to you."
"Who by?"
"The landlord of the Alpha."
"Oh, yes; I sent him a couple of dozen."
"Fine birds they were, too. Now where did you get them from?"
"Now, then, mister,"
"what are you driving at? Let’s have it straight, now."
"It is straight enough. I should like to know who sold you the geesewhich you supplied to the Alpha."
"Well then, I shan’t tell you. So now!"
"Oh, it is a matter of no importance; but I don’t know why you shouldbe so warm over such a trifle."
"Warm! You’d be as warm, maybe, if you were as pestered as I am. When Ipay good money for a good article there should be an end of thebusiness; but it’s ‘Where are the geese?’ and ‘Who did you sell thegeese to?’ and ‘What will you take for the geese?’ One would think theywere the only geese in the world, to hear the fuss that is made overthem."
"Well, I have no connection with any other people who have been makinginquiries,"
"If you won’t tell us the bet isoff, that is all. But I’m always ready to back my opinion on a matterof fowls, and I have a fiver on it that the bird I ate is countrybred."
"Well, then, you’ve lost your fiver, for it’s town bred,"
"It’s nothing of the kind."
"I say it is."
"I don’t believe it."
"D’you think you know more about fowls than I, who have handled themever since I was a nipper? I tell you, all those birds that went to theAlpha were town bred."
"You’ll never persuade me to believe that."
"Will you bet, then?"
"It’s merely taking your money, for I know that I am right. But I’llhave a sovereign on with you, just to teach you not to be obstinate."
"Bring me the books, Bill,"
"Now then, Mr. Cocksure,"
"I thought that I was outof geese, but before I finish you’ll find that there is still one leftin my shop. You see this little book?"
"Well?"
"That’s the list of the folk from whom I buy. D’you see? Well, then,here on this page are the country folk, and the numbers after theirnames are where their accounts are in the big ledger. Now, then! Yousee this other page in red ink? Well, that is a list of my townsuppliers. Now, look at that third name. Just read it out to me."
"Mrs. Oakshott, 117, Brixton Road—249,"
"Quite so. Now turn that up in the ledger."
"Here you are, ‘Mrs. Oakshott,117, Brixton Road, egg and poultry supplier.’"
"Now, then, what’s the last entry?"
"‘December 22nd. Twenty-four geese at 7_s_. 6_d_.’"
"Quite so. There you are. And underneath?"
"‘Sold to Mr. Windigate of the Alpha, at 12_s_.’"
"What have you to say now?"
"When you see a man with whiskers of that cut and the ‘Pink ’un’protruding out of his pocket, you can always draw him by a bet,"
"I daresay that if I had put £ 100 down in front of him, that manwould not have given me such complete information as was drawn from himby the idea that he was doing me on a wager. Well, Watson, we are, Ifancy, nearing the end of our quest, and the only point which remainsto be determined is whether we should go on to this Mrs. Oakshottto-night, or whether we should reserve it for to-morrow. It is clearfrom what that surly fellow said that there are others besidesourselves who are anxious about the matter, and I should—"
"I’ve had enough of you and your geese,"
"I wish you wereall at the devil together. If you come pestering me any more with yoursilly talk I’ll set the dog at you. You bring Mrs. Oakshott here andI’ll answer her, but what have you to do with it? Did I buy the geeseoff you?"
"No; but one of them was mine all the same,"
"Well, then, ask Mrs. Oakshott for it."
"She told me to ask you."
"Well, you can ask the King of Proosia, for all I care. I’ve had enoughof it. Get out of this!"
"Ha! this may save us a visit to Brixton Road,"
"Comewith me, and we will see what is to be made of this fellow."
"Who are you, then? What do you want?"
"You will excuse me,"
"but I could not helpoverhearing the questions which you put to the salesman just now. Ithink that I could be of assistance to you."
"You? Who are you? How could you know anything of the matter?"
"My name is Sherlock Holmes. It is my business to know what otherpeople don’t know."
"But you can know nothing of this?"
"Excuse me, I know everything of it. You are endeavouring to trace somegeese which were sold by Mrs. Oakshott, of Brixton Road, to a salesmannamed Breckinridge, by him in turn to Mr. Windigate, of the Alpha, andby him to his club, of which Mr. Henry Baker is a member."
"Oh, sir, you are the very man whom I have longed to meet,"
"I canhardly explain to you how interested I am in this matter."
"In that casewe had better discuss it in a cosy room rather than in this wind-sweptmarket-place,"
"But pray tell me, before we go farther, who itis that I have the pleasure of assisting."
"My name is John Robinson,"
"No, no; the real name,"
"It is always awkwarddoing business with an alias."
"Well then,"
"my real name is James Ryder."
"Precisely so. Head attendant at the Hotel Cosmopolitan. Pray step intothe cab, and I shall soon be able to tell you everything which youwould wish to know."
"Here we are!"
"Thefire looks very seasonable in this weather. You look cold, Mr. Ryder.Pray take the basket-chair. I will just put on my slippers before wesettle this little matter of yours. Now, then! You want to know whatbecame of those geese?"
"Yes, sir."
"Or rather, I fancy, of that goose. It was one bird, I imagine in whichyou were interested—white, with a black bar across the tail."
"Oh, sir,"
"can you tell mewhere it went to?"
"It came here."
"Here?"
"Yes, and a most remarkable bird it proved. I don’t wonder that youshould take an interest in it. It laid an egg after it was dead—thebonniest, brightest little blue egg that ever was seen. I have it herein my museum."
"The game’s up, Ryder,"
"Hold up, man, or you’llbe into the fire! Give him an arm back into his chair, Watson. He’s notgot blood enough to go in for felony with impunity. Give him a dash ofbrandy. So! Now he looks a little more human. What a shrimp it is, tobe sure!"
"I have almost every link in my hands, and all the proofs which I couldpossibly need, so there is little which you need tell me. Still, thatlittle may as well be cleared up to make the case complete. You hadheard, Ryder, of this blue stone of the Countess of Morcar’s?"
"It was Catherine Cusack who told me of it,"
"I see—her ladyship’s waiting-maid. Well, the temptation of suddenwealth so easily acquired was too much for you, as it has been forbetter men before you; but you were not very scrupulous in the meansyou used. It seems to me, Ryder, that there is the making of a verypretty villain in you. You knew that this man Horner, the plumber, hadbeen concerned in some such matter before, and that suspicion wouldrest the more readily upon him. What did you do, then? You made somesmall job in my lady’s room—you and your confederate Cusack—and youmanaged that he should be the man sent for. Then, when he had left, yourifled the jewel-case, raised the alarm, and had this unfortunate manarrested. You then—"
"For God’s sake, have mercy!"
"Think ofmy father! Of my mother! It would break their hearts. I never wentwrong before! I never will again. I swear it. I’ll swear it on a Bible.Oh, don’t bring it into court! For Christ’s sake, don’t!"
"Get back into your chair!"
"It is very well tocringe and crawl now, but you thought little enough of this poor Hornerin the dock for a crime of which he knew nothing."
"I will fly, Mr. Holmes. I will leave the country, sir. Then the chargeagainst him will break down."
"Hum! We will talk about that. And now let us hear a true account ofthe next act. How came the stone into the goose, and how came the gooseinto the open market? Tell us the truth, for there lies your only hopeof safety."
"I will tell you it justas it happened, sir,"
"Well, then, of course I saw it all, and I ran off as hard as my feetwould carry me to this man Breckinridge; but he had sold the lot atonce, and not one word would he tell me as to where they had gone. Youheard him yourselves to-night. Well, he has always answered me likethat. My sister thinks that I am going mad. Sometimes I think that I ammyself. And now—and now I am myself a branded thief, without everhaving touched the wealth for which I sold my character. God help me!God help me!"
"Get out!"
"What, sir! Oh, Heaven bless you!"
"No more words. Get out!"
"After all, Watson,"
"I am not retained by the police to supply their deficiencies. IfHorner were in danger it would be another thing; but this fellow willnot appear against him, and the case must collapse. I suppose that I amcommuting a felony, but it is just possible that I am saving a soul.This fellow will not go wrong again; he is too terribly frightened.Send him to gaol now, and you make him a gaol-bird for life. Besides,it is the season of forgiveness. Chance has put in our way a mostsingular and whimsical problem, and its solution is its own reward. Ifyou will have the goodness to touch the bell, Doctor, we will beginanother investigation, in which, also a bird will be the chieffeature."
"Very sorry to knock you up, Watson,"
"but it’s the common lotthis morning. Mrs. Hudson has been knocked up, she retorted upon me,and I on you."
"What is it, then—a fire?"
"No; a client. It seems that a young lady has arrived in a considerablestate of excitement, who insists upon seeing me. She is waiting now inthe sitting-room. Now, when young ladies wander about the metropolis atthis hour of the morning, and knock sleepy people up out of their beds,I presume that it is something very pressing which they have tocommunicate. Should it prove to be an interesting case, you would, I amsure, wish to follow it from the outset. I thought, at any rate, that Ishould call you and give you the chance."
"My dear fellow, I would not miss it for anything."
"Good-morning, madam,"
"My name is SherlockHolmes. This is my intimate friend and associate, Dr. Watson, beforewhom you can speak as freely as before myself. Ha! I am glad to seethat Mrs. Hudson has had the good sense to light the fire. Pray draw upto it, and I shall order you a cup of hot coffee, for I observe thatyou are shivering."
"It is not cold which makes me shiver,"
"What, then?"
"It is fear, Mr. Holmes. It is terror."
"You must not fear,"
"We shall soon set matters right, I have no doubt. Youhave come in by train this morning, I see."
"You know me, then?"
"No, but I observe the second half of a return ticket in the palm ofyour left glove. You must have started early, and yet you had a gooddrive in a dog-cart, along heavy roads, before you reached thestation."
"There is no mystery, my dear madam,"
"The left armof your jacket is spattered with mud in no less than seven places. Themarks are perfectly fresh. There is no vehicle save a dog-cart whichthrows up mud in that way, and then only when you sit on the left-handside of the driver."
"Whatever your reasons may be, you are perfectly correct,"
"Istarted from home before six, reached Leatherhead at twenty past, andcame in by the first train to Waterloo. Sir, I can stand this strain nolonger; I shall go mad if it continues. I have no one to turn to—none,save only one, who cares for me, and he, poor fellow, can be of littleaid. I have heard of you, Mr. Holmes; I have heard of you from Mrs.Farintosh, whom you helped in the hour of her sore need. It was fromher that I had your address. Oh, sir, do you not think that you couldhelp me, too, and at least throw a little light through the densedarkness which surrounds me? At present it is out of my power to rewardyou for your services, but in a month or six weeks I shall be married,with the control of my own income, and then at least you shall not findme ungrateful."
"Farintosh,"
"Ah yes, I recall the case; it was concerned withan opal tiara. I think it was before your time, Watson. I can only say,madam, that I shall be happy to devote the same care to your case as Idid to that of your friend. As to reward, my profession is its ownreward; but you are at liberty to defray whatever expenses I may be putto, at the time which suits you best. And now I beg that you will laybefore us everything that may help us in forming an opinion upon thematter."
"Alas!"
"the very horror of my situation lies inthe fact that my fears are so vague, and my suspicions depend soentirely upon small points, which might seem trivial to another, thateven he to whom of all others I have a right to look for help andadvice looks upon all that I tell him about it as the fancies of anervous woman. He does not say so, but I can read it from his soothinganswers and averted eyes. But I have heard, Mr. Holmes, that you cansee deeply into the manifold wickedness of the human heart. You mayadvise me how to walk amid the dangers which encompass me."
"I am all attention, madam."
"My name is Helen Stoner, and I am living with my stepfather, who isthe last survivor of one of the oldest Saxon families in England, theRoylotts of Stoke Moran, on the western border of Surrey."
"The name is familiar to me,"
"You can imagine from what I say that my poor sister Julia and I had nogreat pleasure in our lives. No servant would stay with us, and for along time we did all the work of the house. She was but thirty at thetime of her death, and yet her hair had already begun to whiten, evenas mine has."
"Your sister is dead, then?"
"She died just two years ago, and it is of her death that I wish tospeak to you. You can understand that, living the life which I havedescribed, we were little likely to see anyone of our own age andposition. We had, however, an aunt, my mother’s maiden sister, MissHonoria Westphail, who lives near Harrow, and we were occasionallyallowed to pay short visits at this lady’s house. Julia went there atChristmas two years ago, and met there a half-pay major of marines, towhom she became engaged. My stepfather learned of the engagement whenmy sister returned and offered no objection to the marriage; but withina fortnight of the day which had been fixed for the wedding, theterrible event occurred which has deprived me of my only companion."
"Pray be precise as to details,"
"It is easy for me to be so, for every event of that dreadful time isseared into my memory. The manor-house is, as I have already said, veryold, and only one wing is now inhabited. The bedrooms in this wing areon the ground floor, the sitting-rooms being in the central block ofthe buildings. Of these bedrooms the first is Dr. Roylott’s, the secondmy sister’s, and the third my own. There is no communication betweenthem, but they all open out into the same corridor. Do I make myselfplain?"
"Perfectly so."
"‘Well, it is of no great consequence, at any rate.’ She smiled back atme, closed my door, and a few moments later I heard her key turn in thelock."
"Indeed,"
"Was it your custom always to lock yourselves inat night?"
"Always."
"And why?"
"I think that I mentioned to you that the Doctor kept a cheetah and ababoon. We had no feeling of security unless our doors were locked."
"Quite so. Pray proceed with your statement."
"I could not sleep that night. A vague feeling of impending misfortuneimpressed me. My sister and I, you will recollect, were twins, and youknow how subtle are the links which bind two souls which are so closelyallied. It was a wild night. The wind was howling outside, and the rainwas beating and splashing against the windows. Suddenly, amid all thehubbub of the gale, there burst forth the wild scream of a terrifiedwoman. I knew that it was my sister’s voice. I sprang from my bed,wrapped a shawl round me, and rushed into the corridor. As I opened mydoor I seemed to hear a low whistle, such as my sister described, and afew moments later a clanging sound, as if a mass of metal had fallen.As I ran down the passage, my sister’s door was unlocked, and revolvedslowly upon its hinges. I stared at it horror-stricken, not knowingwhat was about to issue from it. By the light of the corridor-lamp Isaw my sister appear at the opening, her face blanched with terror, herhands groping for help, her whole figure swaying to and fro like thatof a drunkard. I ran to her and threw my arms round her, but at thatmoment her knees seemed to give way and she fell to the ground. Shewrithed as one who is in terrible pain, and her limbs were dreadfullyconvulsed. At first I thought that she had not recognised me, but as Ibent over her she suddenly shrieked out in a voice which I shall neverforget, ‘Oh, my God! Helen! It was the band! The speckled band!’ Therewas something else which she would fain have said, and she stabbed withher finger into the air in the direction of the Doctor’s room, but afresh convulsion seized her and choked her words. I rushed out, callingloudly for my stepfather, and I met him hastening from his room in hisdressing-gown. When he reached my sister’s side she was unconscious,and though he poured brandy down her throat and sent for medical aidfrom the village, all efforts were in vain, for she slowly sank anddied without having recovered her consciousness. Such was the dreadfulend of my beloved sister."
"One moment,"
"are you sure about this whistle andmetallic sound? Could you swear to it?"
"That was what the county coroner asked me at the inquiry. It is mystrong impression that I heard it, and yet, among the crash of the galeand the creaking of an old house, I may possibly have been deceived."
"Was your sister dressed?"
"No, she was in her night-dress. In her right hand was found thecharred stump of a match, and in her left a match-box."
"Showing that she had struck a light and looked about her when thealarm took place. That is important. And what conclusions did thecoroner come to?"
"He investigated the case with great care, for Dr. Roylott’s conducthad long been notorious in the county, but he was unable to find anysatisfactory cause of death. My evidence showed that the door had beenfastened upon the inner side, and the windows were blocked byold-fashioned shutters with broad iron bars, which were secured everynight. The walls were carefully sounded, and were shown to be quitesolid all round, and the flooring was also thoroughly examined, withthe same result. The chimney is wide, but is barred up by four largestaples. It is certain, therefore, that my sister was quite alone whenshe met her end. Besides, there were no marks of any violence uponher."
"How about poison?"
"The doctors examined her for it, but without success."
"What do you think that this unfortunate lady died of, then?"
"It is my belief that she died of pure fear and nervous shock, thoughwhat it was that frightened her I cannot imagine."
"Were there gipsies in the plantation at the time?"
"Yes, there are nearly always some there."
"Ah, and what did you gather from this allusion to a band—a speckledband?"
"Sometimes I have thought that it was merely the wild talk of delirium,sometimes that it may have referred to some band of people, perhaps tothese very gipsies in the plantation. I do not know whether the spottedhandkerchiefs which so many of them wear over their heads might havesuggested the strange adjective which she used."
"These are very deep waters,"
"pray go on with yournarrative."
"Two years have passed since then, and my life has been until latelylonelier than ever. A month ago, however, a dear friend, whom I haveknown for many years, has done me the honour to ask my hand inmarriage. His name is Armitage—Percy Armitage—the second son of Mr.Armitage, of Crane Water, near Reading. My stepfather has offered noopposition to the match, and we are to be married in the course of thespring. Two days ago some repairs were started in the west wing of thebuilding, and my bedroom wall has been pierced, so that I have had tomove into the chamber in which my sister died, and to sleep in the verybed in which she slept. Imagine, then, my thrill of terror when lastnight, as I lay awake, thinking over her terrible fate, I suddenlyheard in the silence of the night the low whistle which had been theherald of her own death. I sprang up and lit the lamp, but nothing wasto be seen in the room. I was too shaken to go to bed again, however,so I dressed, and as soon as it was daylight I slipped down, got adog-cart at the Crown Inn, which is opposite, and drove to Leatherhead,from whence I have come on this morning with the one object of seeingyou and asking your advice."
"You have done wisely,"
"But have you told me all?"
"Yes, all."
"Miss Roylott, you have not. You are screening your stepfather."
"Why, what do you mean?"
"You have been cruelly used,"
"He is ahard man,"
"and perhaps he hardly knows his own strength."
"This is a very deep business,"
"There are a thousanddetails which I should desire to know before I decide upon our courseof action. Yet we have not a moment to lose. If we were to come toStoke Moran to-day, would it be possible for us to see over these roomswithout the knowledge of your stepfather?"
"As it happens, he spoke of coming into town to-day upon some mostimportant business. It is probable that he will be away all day, andthat there would be nothing to disturb you. We have a housekeeper now,but she is old and foolish, and I could easily get her out of the way."
"Excellent. You are not averse to this trip, Watson?"
"By no means."
"Then we shall both come. What are you going to do yourself?"
"I have one or two things which I would wish to do now that I am intown. But I shall return by the twelve o’clock train, so as to be therein time for your coming."
"And you may expect us early in the afternoon. I have myself some smallbusiness matters to attend to. Will you not wait and breakfast?"
"No, I must go. My heart is lightened already since I have confided mytrouble to you. I shall look forward to seeing you again thisafternoon."
"And what do you think of it all, Watson?"
"It seems to me to be a most dark and sinister business."
"Dark enough and sinister enough."
"Yet if the lady is correct in saying that the flooring and walls aresound, and that the door, window, and chimney are impassable, then hersister must have been undoubtedly alone when she met her mysteriousend."
"What becomes, then, of these nocturnal whistles, and what of the verypeculiar words of the dying woman?"
"I cannot think."
"When you combine the ideas of whistles at night, the presence of aband of gipsies who are on intimate terms with this old doctor, thefact that we have every reason to believe that the doctor has aninterest in preventing his stepdaughter’s marriage, the dying allusionto a band, and, finally, the fact that Miss Helen Stoner heard ametallic clang, which might have been caused by one of those metal barsthat secured the shutters falling back into its place, I think thatthere is good ground to think that the mystery may be cleared alongthose lines."
"But what, then, did the gipsies do?"
"I cannot imagine."
"I see many objections to any such theory."
"And so do I. It is precisely for that reason that we are going toStoke Moran this day. I want to see whether the objections are fatal,or if they may be explained away. But what in the name of the devil!"
"Which of you is Holmes?"
"My name, sir; but you have the advantage of me,"
"I am Dr. Grimesby Roylott, of Stoke Moran."
"Indeed, Doctor,"
"Pray take a seat."
"I will do nothing of the kind. My stepdaughter has been here. I havetraced her. What has she been saying to you?"
"It is a little cold for the time of the year,"
"What has she been saying to you?"
"But I have heard that the crocuses promise well,"
"Ha! You put me off, do you?"
"I know you, you scoundrel! Ihave heard of you before. You are Holmes, the meddler."
"Holmes, the busybody!"
"Holmes, the Scotland Yard Jack-in-office!"
"Your conversation is most entertaining,"
"When you go out close the door, for there is a decideddraught."
"I will go when I have had my say. Don’t you dare to meddle with myaffairs. I know that Miss Stoner has been here. I traced her! I am adangerous man to fall foul of! See here."
"See that you keep yourself out of my grip,"
"He seems a very amiable person,"
"I am notquite so bulky, but if he had remained I might have shown him that mygrip was not much more feeble than his own."
"Fancy his having the insolence to confound me with the officialdetective force! This incident gives zest to our investigation,however, and I only trust that our little friend will not suffer fromher imprudence in allowing this brute to trace her. And now, Watson, weshall order breakfast, and afterwards I shall walk down to Doctors’Commons, where I hope to get some data which may help us in thismatter."
"I have seen the will of the deceased wife,"
"To determine itsexact meaning I have been obliged to work out the present prices of theinvestments with which it is concerned. The total income, which at thetime of the wife’s death was little short of £ 1,100, is now, throughthe fall in agricultural prices, not more than £ 750. Each daughter canclaim an income of £ 250, in case of marriage. It is evident,therefore, that if both girls had married, this beauty would have had amere pittance, while even one of them would cripple him to a veryserious extent. My morning’s work has not been wasted, since it hasproved that he has the very strongest motives for standing in the wayof anything of the sort. And now, Watson, this is too serious fordawdling, especially as the old man is aware that we are interestingourselves in his affairs; so if you are ready, we shall call a cab anddrive to Waterloo. I should be very much obliged if you would slip yourrevolver into your pocket. An Eley’s No. 2 is an excellent argumentwith gentlemen who can twist steel pokers into knots. That and atooth-brush are, I think, all that we need."
"Look there!"
"Stoke Moran?"
"Yes, sir, that be the house of Dr. Grimesby Roylott,"
"There is some building going on there,"
"that is where weare going."
"There’s the village,"
"but if you want to get to the house, you’llfind it shorter to get over this stile, and so by the footpath over thefields. There it is, where the lady is walking."
"And the lady, I fancy, is Miss Stoner,"
"Yes, I think we had better do as you suggest."
"I thought it as well,"
"that thisfellow should think we had come here as architects, or on some definitebusiness. It may stop his gossip. Good-afternoon, Miss Stoner. You seethat we have been as good as our word."
"I have been waiting so eagerly for you,"
"All has turned out splendidly.Dr. Roylott has gone to town, and it is unlikely that he will be backbefore evening."
"We have had the pleasure of making the Doctor’s acquaintance,"
"Good heavens!"
"he has followed me, then."
"So it appears."
"He is so cunning that I never know when I am safe from him. What willhe say when he returns?"
"He must guard himself, for he may find that there is someone morecunning than himself upon his track. You must lock yourself up from himto-night. If he is violent, we shall take you away to your aunt’s atHarrow. Now, we must make the best use of our time, so kindly take usat once to the rooms which we are to examine."
"This, I take it, belongs to the room in which you used to sleep, thecentre one to your sister’s, and the one next to the main building toDr. Roylott’s chamber?"
"Exactly so. But I am now sleeping in the middle one."
"Pending the alterations, as I understand. By the way, there does notseem to be any very pressing need for repairs at that end wall."
"There were none. I believe that it was an excuse to move me from myroom."
"Ah! that is suggestive. Now, on the other side of this narrow wingruns the corridor from which these three rooms open. There are windowsin it, of course?"
"Yes, but very small ones. Too narrow for anyone to pass through."
"As you both locked your doors at night, your rooms were unapproachablefrom that side. Now, would you have the kindness to go into your roomand bar your shutters?"
"Hum!"
"my theory certainlypresents some difficulties. No one could pass these shutters if theywere bolted. Well, we shall see if the inside throws any light upon thematter."
"Where does that bell communicate with?"
"It goes to the housekeeper’s room."
"It looks newer than the other things?"
"Yes, it was only put there a couple of years ago."
"Your sister asked for it, I suppose?"
"No, I never heard of her using it. We used always to get what wewanted for ourselves."
"Indeed, it seemed unnecessary to put so nice a bell-pull there. Youwill excuse me for a few minutes while I satisfy myself as to thisfloor."
"Why, it’s a dummy,"
"Won’t it ring?"
"No, it is not even attached to a wire. This is very interesting. Youcan see now that it is fastened to a hook just above where the littleopening for the ventilator is."
"How very absurd! I never noticed that before."
"Very strange!"
"There are one ortwo very singular points about this room. For example, what a fool abuilder must be to open a ventilator into another room, when, with thesame trouble, he might have communicated with the outside air!"
"That is also quite modern,"
"Done about the same time as the bell-rope?"
"Yes, there were several little changes carried out about that time."
"They seem to have been of a most interesting character—dummybell-ropes, and ventilators which do not ventilate. With yourpermission, Miss Stoner, we shall now carry our researches into theinner apartment."
"What’s in here?"
"My stepfather’s business papers."
"Oh! you have seen inside, then?"
"Only once, some years ago. I remember that it was full of papers."
"There isn’t a cat in it, for example?"
"No. What a strange idea!"
"Well, look at this!"
"No; we don’t keep a cat. But there is a cheetah and a baboon."
"Ah, yes, of course! Well, a cheetah is just a big cat, and yet asaucer of milk does not go very far in satisfying its wants, I daresay.There is one point which I should wish to determine."
"Thank you. That is quite settled,"
"Hullo! Here is something interesting!"
"What do you make of that, Watson?"
"It’s a common enough lash. But I don’t know why it should be tied."
"That is not quite so common, is it? Ah, me! it’s a wicked world, andwhen a clever man turns his brains to crime it is the worst of all. Ithink that I have seen enough now, Miss Stoner, and with yourpermission we shall walk out upon the lawn."
"It is very essential, Miss Stoner,"
"that you shouldabsolutely follow my advice in every respect."
"I shall most certainly do so."
"The matter is too serious for any hesitation. Your life may dependupon your compliance."
"I assure you that I am in your hands."
"In the first place, both my friend and I must spend the night in yourroom."
"Yes, it must be so. Let me explain. I believe that that is the villageinn over there?"
"Yes, that is the Crown."
"Very good. Your windows would be visible from there?"
"Certainly."
"You must confine yourself to your room, on pretence of a headache,when your stepfather comes back. Then when you hear him retire for thenight, you must open the shutters of your window, undo the hasp, putyour lamp there as a signal to us, and then withdraw quietly witheverything which you are likely to want into the room which you used tooccupy. I have no doubt that, in spite of the repairs, you could managethere for one night."
"Oh, yes, easily."
"The rest you will leave in our hands."
"But what will you do?"
"We shall spend the night in your room, and we shall investigate thecause of this noise which has disturbed you."
"I believe, Mr. Holmes, that you have already made up your mind,"
"Perhaps I have."
"Then, for pity’s sake, tell me what was the cause of my sister’sdeath."
"I should prefer to have clearer proofs before I speak."
"You can at least tell me whether my own thought is correct, and if shedied from some sudden fright."
"No, I do not think so. I think that there was probably some moretangible cause. And now, Miss Stoner, we must leave you for if Dr.Roylott returned and saw us our journey would be in vain. Good-bye, andbe brave, for if you will do what I have told you, you may rest assuredthat we shall soon drive away the dangers that threaten you."
"Do you know, Watson,"
"I have really some scruples as to taking you to-night. Thereis a distinct element of danger."
"Can I be of assistance?"
"Your presence might be invaluable."
"Then I shall certainly come."
"It is very kind of you."
"You speak of danger. You have evidently seen more in these rooms thanwas visible to me."
"No, but I fancy that I may have deduced a little more. I imagine thatyou saw all that I did."
"I saw nothing remarkable save the bell-rope, and what purpose thatcould answer I confess is more than I can imagine."
"You saw the ventilator, too?"
"Yes, but I do not think that it is such a very unusual thing to have asmall opening between two rooms. It was so small that a rat couldhardly pass through."
"I knew that we should find a ventilator before ever we came to StokeMoran."
"My dear Holmes!"
"Oh, yes, I did. You remember in her statement she said that her sistercould smell Dr. Roylott’s cigar. Now, of course that suggested at oncethat there must be a communication between the two rooms. It could onlybe a small one, or it would have been remarked upon at the coroner’sinquiry. I deduced a ventilator."
"But what harm can there be in that?"
"Well, there is at least a curious coincidence of dates. A ventilatoris made, a cord is hung, and a lady who sleeps in the bed dies. Doesnot that strike you?"
"I cannot as yet see any connection."
"Did you observe anything very peculiar about that bed?"
"No."
"It was clamped to the floor. Did you ever see a bed fastened like thatbefore?"
"I cannot say that I have."
"The lady could not move her bed. It must always be in the samerelative position to the ventilator and to the rope—or so we may callit, since it was clearly never meant for a bell-pull."
"Holmes,"
"I seem to see dimly what you are hinting at. We areonly just in time to prevent some subtle and horrible crime."
"Subtle enough and horrible enough. When a doctor does go wrong he isthe first of criminals. He has nerve and he has knowledge. Palmer andPritchard were among the heads of their profession. This man strikeseven deeper, but I think, Watson, that we shall be able to strikedeeper still. But we shall have horrors enough before the night isover; for goodness’ sake let us have a quiet pipe and turn our mindsfor a few hours to something more cheerful."
"That is our signal,"
"it comesfrom the middle window."
"My God!"
"did you see it?"
"It is a nice household,"
"That is the baboon."
"The least sound would be fatal to our plans."
"We must sit without light. He would see it through the ventilator."
"Do not go asleep; your very life may depend upon it. Have your pistolready in case we should need it. I will sit on the side of the bed, andyou in that chair."
"You see it, Watson?"
"You see it?"
"What can it mean?"
"It means that it is all over,"
"And perhaps, afterall, it is for the best. Take your pistol, and we will enter Dr.Roylott’s room."
"The band! the speckled band!"
"It is a swamp adder!"
"the deadliest snake in India. Hehas died within ten seconds of being bitten. Violence does, in truth,recoil upon the violent, and the schemer falls into the pit which hedigs for another. Let us thrust this creature back into its den, and wecan then remove Miss Stoner to some place of shelter and let the countypolice know what has happened."
"I had,"
"I had come to these conclusions before ever I had entered his room. Aninspection of his chair showed me that he had been in the habit ofstanding on it, which of course would be necessary in order that heshould reach the ventilator. The sight of the safe, the saucer of milk,and the loop of whipcord were enough to finally dispel any doubts whichmay have remained. The metallic clang heard by Miss Stoner wasobviously caused by her stepfather hastily closing the door of his safeupon its terrible occupant. Having once made up my mind, you know thesteps which I took in order to put the matter to the proof. I heard thecreature hiss as I have no doubt that you did also, and I instantly litthe light and attacked it."
"With the result of driving it through the ventilator."
"And also with the result of causing it to turn upon its master at theother side. Some of the blows of my cane came home and roused itssnakish temper, so that it flew upon the first person it saw. In thisway I am no doubt indirectly responsible for Dr. Grimesby Roylott’sdeath, and I cannot say that it is likely to weigh very heavily upon myconscience."
"I’ve got him here,"
"he’s all right."
"What is it, then?"
"It’s a new patient,"
"I thought I’d bring him roundmyself; then he couldn’t slip away. There he is, all safe and sound. Imust go now, Doctor; I have my dooties, just the same as you."
"I am sorry to knock you up so early, Doctor,"
"but I have hada very serious accident during the night. I came in by train thismorning, and on inquiring at Paddington as to where I might find adoctor, a worthy fellow very kindly escorted me here. I gave the maid acard, but I see that she has left it upon the side-table."
"Mr. Victor Hatherley, hydraulicengineer, 16A, Victoria Street (3rd floor)."
"I regret that I have kept youwaiting,"
"You are fresh froma night journey, I understand, which is in itself a monotonousoccupation."
"Oh, my night could not be called monotonous,"
"Stop it!"
"pull yourself together!"
"I have been making a fool of myself,"
"Not at all. Drink this."
"That’s better!"
"And now, Doctor, perhaps you would kindlyattend to my thumb, or rather to the place where my thumb used to be."
"Good heavens!"
"this is a terrible injury. It must have bledconsiderably."
"Yes, it did. I fainted when it was done, and I think that I must havebeen senseless for a long time. When I came to I found that it wasstill bleeding, so I tied one end of my handkerchief very tightly roundthe wrist and braced it up with a twig."
"Excellent! You should have been a surgeon."
"It is a question of hydraulics, you see, and came within my ownprovince."
"This has been done,"
"by a very heavy andsharp instrument."
"A thing like a cleaver,"
"An accident, I presume?"
"By no means."
"What! a murderous attack?"
"Very murderous indeed."
"You horrify me."
"How is that?"
"Capital! Between your brandy and your bandage, I feel a new man. I wasvery weak, but I have had a good deal to go through."
"Perhaps you had better not speak of the matter. It is evidently tryingto your nerves."
"Oh, no, not now. I shall have to tell my tale to the police; but,between ourselves, if it were not for the convincing evidence of thiswound of mine, I should be surprised if they believed my statement, forit is a very extraordinary one, and I have not much in the way of proofwith which to back it up; and, even if they believe me, the clues whichI can give them are so vague that it is a question whether justice willbe done."
"Ha!"
"if it is anything in the nature of a problem which youdesire to see solved, I should strongly recommend you to come to myfriend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, before you go to the official police."
"Oh, I have heard of that fellow,"
"and I shouldbe very glad if he would take the matter up, though of course I mustuse the official police as well. Would you give me an introduction tohim?"
"I’ll do better. I’ll take you round to him myself."
"I should be immensely obliged to you."
"We’ll call a cab and go together. We shall just be in time to have alittle breakfast with him. Do you feel equal to it?"
"Yes; I shall not feel easy until I have told my story."
"Then my servant will call a cab, and I shall be with you in aninstant."
"It is easy to see that your experience has been no common one, Mr.Hatherley,"
"Pray, lie down there and make yourself absolutelyat home. Tell us what you can, but stop when you are tired and keep upyour strength with a little stimulant."
"Thank you,"
"but I have felt another man since thedoctor bandaged me, and I think that your breakfast has completed thecure. I shall take up as little of your valuable time as possible, so Ishall start at once upon my peculiar experiences."
"You must know,"
"At Reading I had to change not only my carriage but my station.However, I was in time for the last train to Eyford, and I reached thelittle dim-lit station after eleven o’clock. I was the only passengerwho got out there, and there was no one upon the platform save a singlesleepy porter with a lantern. As I passed out through the wicket gate,however, I found my acquaintance of the morning waiting in the shadowupon the other side. Without a word he grasped my arm and hurried meinto a carriage, the door of which was standing open. He drew up thewindows on either side, tapped on the wood-work, and away we went asfast as the horse could go."
"One horse?"
"Yes, only one."
"Did you observe the colour?"
"Yes, I saw it by the side-lights when I was stepping into thecarriage. It was a chestnut."
"Tired-looking or fresh?"
"Oh, fresh and glossy."
"Thank you. I am sorry to have interrupted you. Pray continue your mostinteresting statement."
"It was too far for me to go, weak and ill as I was. I determined towait until I got back to town before telling my story to the police. Itwas a little past six when I arrived, so I went first to have my wounddressed, and then the doctor was kind enough to bring me along here. Iput the case into your hands and shall do exactly what you advise."
"Here is an advertisement which will interest you,"
"Itappeared in all the papers about a year ago. Listen to this: ‘Lost, onthe 9th inst., Mr. Jeremiah Hayling, aged twenty-six, a hydraulicengineer. Left his lodgings at ten o’clock at night, and has not beenheard of since. Was dressed in,’ etc., etc. Ha! That represents thelast time that the colonel needed to have his machine overhauled, Ifancy."
"Good heavens!"
"Then that explains what the girlsaid."
"Undoubtedly. It is quite clear that the colonel was a cool anddesperate man, who was absolutely determined that nothing should standin the way of his little game, like those out-and-out pirates who willleave no survivor from a captured ship. Well, every moment now isprecious, so if you feel equal to it we shall go down to Scotland Yardat once as a preliminary to starting for Eyford."
"There you are,"
"That circle is drawn at a radius of tenmiles from the village. The place we want must be somewhere near thatline. You said ten miles, I think, sir."
"It was an hour’s good drive."
"And you think that they brought you back all that way when you wereunconscious?"
"They must have done so. I have a confused memory, too, of having beenlifted and conveyed somewhere."
"What I cannot understand,"
"is why they should have spared youwhen they found you lying fainting in the garden. Perhaps the villainwas softened by the woman’s entreaties."
"I hardly think that likely. I never saw a more inexorable face in mylife."
"Oh, we shall soon clear up all that,"
"Well, I havedrawn my circle, and I only wish I knew at what point upon it the folkthat we are in search of are to be found."
"I think I could lay my finger on it,"
"Really, now!"
"you have formed your opinion!Come, now, we shall see who agrees with you. I say it is south, for thecountry is more deserted there."
"And I say east,"
"I am for west,"
"There are severalquiet little villages up there."
"And I am for north,"
"because there are no hills there, andour friend says that he did not notice the carriage go up any."
"Come,"
"it’s a very pretty diversity ofopinion. We have boxed the compass among us. Who do you give yourcasting vote to?"
"You are all wrong."
"But we can’t all be."
"Oh, yes, you can. This is my point."
"This is where we shall find them."
"But the twelve-mile drive?"
"Six out and six back. Nothing simpler. You say yourself that the horsewas fresh and glossy when you got in. How could it be that if it hadgone twelve miles over heavy roads?"
"Indeed, it is a likely ruse enough,"
"Of course there can be no doubt as to the nature of this gang."
"None at all,"
"They are coiners on a large scale, andhave used the machine to form the amalgam which has taken the place ofsilver."
"We have known for some time that a clever gang was at work,"
"They have been turning out half-crowns by the thousand. Weeven traced them as far as Reading, but could get no farther, for theyhad covered their traces in a way that showed that they were very oldhands. But now, thanks to this lucky chance, I think that we have gotthem right enough."
"A house on fire?"
"Yes, sir!"
"When did it break out?"
"I hear that it was during the night, sir, but it has got worse, andthe whole place is in a blaze."
"Whose house is it?"
"Dr. Becher’s."
"Tell me,"
"is Dr. Becher a German, very thin,with a long, sharp nose?"
"No, sir, Dr. Becher is anEnglishman, and there isn’t a man in the parish who has a better-linedwaistcoat. But he has a gentleman staying with him, a patient, as Iunderstand, who is a foreigner, and he looks as if a little goodBerkshire beef would do him no harm."
"That’s it!"
"There is thegravel-drive, and there are the rose-bushes where I lay. That secondwindow is the one that I jumped from."
"Well, at least,"
"you have had your revenge upon them.There can be no question that it was your oil-lamp which, when it wascrushed in the press, set fire to the wooden walls, though no doubtthey were too excited in the chase after you to observe it at the time.Now keep your eyes open in this crowd for your friends of last night,though I very much fear that they are a good hundred miles off by now."
"Well,"
"it has been a pretty business for me! I have lost mythumb and I have lost a fifty-guinea fee, and what have I gained?"
"Experience,"
"Indirectly it may be of value,you know; you have only to put it into words to gain the reputation ofbeing excellent company for the remainder of your existence."
"Here is a very fashionable epistle,"
"Yourmorning letters, if I remember right, were from a fish-monger and atide-waiter."
"Yes, my correspondence has certainly the charm of variety,"
"and the humbler are usually the more interesting.This looks like one of those unwelcome social summonses which call upona man either to be bored or to lie."
"Oh, come, it may prove to be something of interest, after all."
"Not social, then?"
"No, distinctly professional."
"And from a noble client?"
"One of the highest in England."
"My dear fellow, I congratulate you."
"I assure you, Watson, without affectation, that the status of myclient is a matter of less moment to me than the interest of his case.It is just possible, however, that that also may not be wanting in thisnew investigation. You have been reading the papers diligently of late,have you not?"
"It looks like it,"
"I have had nothing else to do."
"It is fortunate, for you will perhaps be able to post me up. I readnothing except the criminal news and the agony column. The latter isalways instructive. But if you have followed recent events so closelyyou must have read about Lord St. Simon and his wedding?"
"Oh, yes, with the deepest interest."
"It is dated from Grosvenor Mansions, written with a quill pen, and thenoble lord has had the misfortune to get a smear of ink upon the outerside of his right little finger,"
"He says four o’clock. It is three now. He will be here in an hour."
"Then I have just time, with your assistance, to get clear upon thesubject. Turn over those papers and arrange the extracts in their orderof time, while I take a glance as to who our client is."
"Here he is,"
"‘Lord Robert Walsingham de Vere St. Simon, second sonof the Duke of Balmoral.’ Hum! ‘Arms: Azure, three caltrops in chiefover a fess sable. Born in 1846.’ He’s forty-one years of age, which ismature for marriage. Was Under-Secretary for the colonies in a lateadministration. The Duke, his father, was at one time Secretary forForeign Affairs. They inherit Plantagenet blood by direct descent, andTudor on the distaff side. Ha! Well, there is nothing very instructivein all this. I think that I must turn to you Watson, for something moresolid."
"I have very little difficulty in finding what I want,"
"forthe facts are quite recent, and the matter struck me as remarkable. Ifeared to refer them to you, however, as I knew that you had an inquiryon hand and that you disliked the intrusion of other matters."
"Oh, you mean the little problem of the Grosvenor Square furniture van.That is quite cleared up now—though, indeed, it was obvious from thefirst. Pray give me the results of your newspaper selections."
"Here is the first notice which I can find. It is in the personalcolumn of the _Morning Post_, and dates, as you see, some weeks back:‘A marriage has been arranged,’ it says, ‘and will, if rumour iscorrect, very shortly take place, between Lord Robert St. Simon, secondson of the Duke of Balmoral, and Miss Hatty Doran, the only daughter ofAloysius Doran. Esq., of San Francisco, Cal., U.S.A.’ That is all."
"Terse and to the point,"
"There was a paragraph amplifying this in one of the society papers ofthe same week. Ah, here it is: ‘There will soon be a call forprotection in the marriage  market, for the present free-tradeprinciple appears to tell heavily against our home product. One by onethe management of the noble houses of Great Britain is passing into thehands of our fair cousins from across the Atlantic. An importantaddition has been made during the last week to the list of the prizeswhich have been borne away by these charming invaders. Lord St. Simon,who has shown himself for over twenty years proof against the littlegod’s arrows, has now definitely announced his approaching marriagewith Miss Hatty Doran, the fascinating daughter of a Californiamillionaire. Miss Doran, whose graceful figure and striking faceattracted much attention at the Westbury House festivities, is an onlychild, and it is currently reported that her dowry will run toconsiderably over the six figures, with expectancies for the future. Asit is an open secret that the Duke of Balmoral has been compelled tosell his pictures within the last few years, and as Lord St. Simon hasno property of his own save the small estate of Birchmoor, it isobvious that the Californian heiress is not the only gainer by analliance which will enable her to make the easy and common transitionfrom a Republican lady to a British peeress.’"
"Anything else?"
"Oh, yes; plenty. Then there is another note in the _Morning Post_ tosay that the marriage would be an absolutely quiet one, that it wouldbe at St. George’s, Hanover Square, that only half a dozen intimatefriends would be invited, and that the party would return to thefurnished house at Lancaster Gate which has been taken by Mr. AloysiusDoran. Two days later—that is, on Wednesday last—there is a curtannouncement that the wedding had taken place, and that the honeymoonwould be passed at Lord Backwater’s place, near Petersfield. Those areall the notices which appeared before the disappearance of the bride."
"Before the what?"
"The vanishing of the lady."
"When did she vanish, then?"
"At the wedding breakfast."
"Indeed. This is more interesting than it promised to be; quitedramatic, in fact."
"Yes; it struck me as being a little out of the common."
"They often vanish before the ceremony, and occasionally during thehoneymoon; but I cannot call to mind anything quite so prompt as this.Pray let me have the details."
"I warn you that they are very incomplete."
"Perhaps we may make them less so."
"‘The ceremony, which was performed at St. George’s, Hanover Square,was a very quiet one, no one being present save the father of thebride, Mr. Aloysius Doran, the Duchess of Balmoral, Lord Backwater,Lord Eustace and Lady Clara St. Simon (the younger brother and sisterof the bridegroom), and Lady Alicia Whittington. The whole partyproceeded afterwards to the house of Mr. Aloysius Doran, at LancasterGate, where breakfast had been prepared. It appears that some littletrouble was caused by a woman, whose name has not been ascertained, whoendeavoured to force her way into the house after the bridal party,alleging that she had some claim upon Lord St. Simon. It was only aftera painful and prolonged scene that she was ejected by the butler andthe footman. The bride, who had fortunately entered the house beforethis unpleasant interruption, had sat down to breakfast with the rest,when she complained of a sudden indisposition and retired to her room.Her prolonged absence having caused some comment, her father followedher, but learned from her maid that she had only come up to her chamberfor an instant, caught up an ulster and bonnet, and hurried down to thepassage. One of the footmen declared that he had seen a lady leave thehouse thus apparelled, but had refused to credit that it was hismistress, believing her to be with the company. On ascertaining thathis daughter had disappeared, Mr. Aloysius Doran, in conjunction withthe bridegroom, instantly put themselves in communication with thepolice, and very energetic inquiries are being made, which willprobably result in a speedy clearing up of this very singular business.Up to a late hour last night, however, nothing had transpired as to thewhereabouts of the missing lady. There are rumours of foul play in thematter, and it is said that the police have caused the arrest of thewoman who had caused the original disturbance, in the belief that, fromjealousy or some other motive, she may have been concerned in thestrange disappearance of the bride.’"
"And is that all?"
"Only one little item in another of the morning papers, but it is asuggestive one."
"And it is—"
"That Miss Flora Millar, the lady who had caused the disturbance, hasactually been arrested. It appears that she was formerly a _danseuse_at the Allegro, and that she has known the bridegroom for some years.There are no further particulars, and the whole case is in your handsnow—so far as it has been set forth in the public press."
"And an exceedingly interesting case it appears to be. I would not havemissed it for worlds. But there is a ring at the bell, Watson, and asthe clock makes it a few minutes after four, I have no doubt that thiswill prove to be our noble client. Do not dream of going, Watson, for Ivery much prefer having a witness, if only as a check to my ownmemory."
"Lord Robert St. Simon,"
"Good-day, Lord St. Simon,"
"Pray takethe basket-chair. This is my friend and colleague, Dr. Watson. Draw upa little to the fire, and we will talk this matter over."
"A most painful matter to me, as you can most readily imagine, Mr.Holmes. I have been cut to the quick. I understand that you havealready managed several delicate cases of this sort, sir, though Ipresume that they were hardly from the same class of society."
"No, I am descending."
"I beg pardon."
"My last client of the sort was a king."
"Oh, really! I had no idea. And which king?"
"The King of Scandinavia."
"What! Had he lost his wife?"
"You can understand,"
"that I extend to theaffairs of my other clients the same secrecy which I promise to you inyours."
"Of course! Very right! very right! I’m sure I beg pardon. As to my owncase, I am ready to give you any information which may assist you informing an opinion."
"Thank you. I have already learned all that is in the public prints,nothing more. I presume that I may take it as correct—this article, forexample, as to the disappearance of the bride."
"Yes, it is correct, as far as itgoes."
"But it needs a great deal of supplementing before anyone could offeran opinion. I think that I may arrive at my facts most directly byquestioning you."
"Pray do so."
"When did you first meet Miss Hatty Doran?"
"In San Francisco, a year ago."
"You were travelling in the States?"
"Yes."
"Did you become engaged then?"
"No."
"But you were on a friendly footing?"
"I was amused by her society, and she could see that I was amused."
"Her father is very rich?"
"He is said to be the richest man on the Pacific slope."
"And how did he make his money?"
"In mining. He had nothing a few years ago. Then he struck gold,invested it, and came up by leaps and bounds."
"Now, what is your own impression as to the young lady’s—your wife’scharacter?"
"You see, Mr. Holmes,"
"my wife was twenty before herfather became a rich man. During that time she ran free in a miningcamp and wandered through woods or mountains, so that her education hascome from Nature rather than from the schoolmaster. She is what we callin England a tomboy, with a strong nature, wild and free, unfettered byany sort of traditions. She is impetuous—volcanic, I was about to say.She is swift in making up her mind and fearless in carrying out herresolutions. On the other hand, I would not have given her the namewhich I have the honour to bear"
"had Inot thought her to be at bottom a noble woman. I believe that she iscapable of heroic self-sacrifice and that anything dishonourable wouldbe repugnant to her."
"Have you her photograph?"
"I brought this with me."
"The young lady came to London, then, and you renewed youracquaintance?"
"Yes, her father brought her over for this last London season. I mether several times, became engaged to her, and have now married her."
"She brought, I understand, a considerable dowry?"
"A fair dowry. Not more than is usual in my family."
"And this, of course, remains to you, since the marriage is a _faitaccompli_?"
"I really have made no inquiries on the subject."
"Very naturally not. Did you see Miss Doran on the day before thewedding?"
"Yes."
"Was she in good spirits?"
"Never better. She kept talking of what we should do in our futurelives."
"Indeed! That is very interesting. And on the morning of the wedding?"
"She was as bright as possible—at least until after the ceremony."
"And did you observe any change in her then?"
"Well, to tell the truth, I saw then the first signs that I had everseen that her temper was just a little sharp. The incident however, wastoo trivial to relate and can have no possible bearing upon the case."
"Pray let us have it, for all that."
"Oh, it is childish. She dropped her bouquet as we went towards thevestry. She was passing the front pew at the time, and it fell overinto the pew. There was a moment’s delay, but the gentleman in the pewhanded it up to her again, and it did not appear to be the worse forthe fall. Yet when I spoke to her of the matter, she answered meabruptly; and in the carriage, on our way home, she seemed absurdlyagitated over this trifling cause."
"Indeed! You say that there was a gentleman in the pew. Some of thegeneral public were present, then?"
"Oh, yes. It is impossible to exclude them when the church is open."
"This gentleman was not one of your wife’s friends?"
"No, no; I call him a gentleman by courtesy, but he was quite acommon-looking person. I hardly noticed his appearance. But really Ithink that we are wandering rather far from the point."
"Lady St. Simon, then, returned from the wedding in a less cheerfulframe of mind than she had gone to it. What did she do on re-enteringher father’s house?"
"I saw her in conversation with her maid."
"And who is her maid?"
"Alice is her name. She is an American and came from California withher."
"A confidential servant?"
"A little too much so. It seemed to me that her mistress allowed her totake great liberties. Still, of course, in America they look upon thesethings in a different way."
"How long did she speak to this Alice?"
"Oh, a few minutes. I had something else to think of."
"You did not overhear what they said?"
"Lady St. Simon said something about ‘jumping a claim.’ She wasaccustomed to use slang of the kind. I have no idea what she meant."
"American slang is very expressive sometimes. And what did your wife dowhen she finished speaking to her maid?"
"She walked into the breakfast-room."
"On your arm?"
"No, alone. She was very independent in little matters like that. Then,after we had sat down for ten minutes or so, she rose hurriedly,muttered some words of apology, and left the room. She never cameback."
"But this maid, Alice, as I understand, deposes that she went to herroom, covered her bride’s dress with a long ulster, put on a bonnet,and went out."
"Quite so. And she was afterwards seen walking into Hyde Park incompany with Flora Millar, a woman who is now in custody, and who hadalready made a disturbance at Mr. Doran’s house that morning."
"Ah, yes. I should like a few particulars as to this young lady, andyour relations to her."
"We havebeen on a friendly footing for some years—I may say on a _very_friendly footing. She used to be at the Allegro. I have not treated herungenerously, and she had no just cause of complaint against me, butyou know what women are, Mr. Holmes. Flora was a dear little thing, butexceedingly hot-headed and devotedly attached to me. She wrote medreadful letters when she heard that I was about to be married, and, totell the truth, the reason why I had the marriage celebrated so quietlywas that I feared lest there might be a scandal in the church. She cameto Mr. Doran’s door just after we returned, and she endeavoured to pushher way in, uttering very abusive expressions towards my wife, and eventhreatening her, but I had foreseen the possibility of something of thesort, and I had two police fellows there in private clothes, who soonpushed her out again. She was quiet when she saw that there was no goodin making a row."
"Did your wife hear all this?"
"No, thank goodness, she did not."
"And she was seen walking with this very woman afterwards?"
"Yes. That is what Mr. Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, looks upon as soserious. It is thought that Flora decoyed my wife out and laid someterrible trap for her."
"Well, it is a possible supposition."
"You think so, too?"
"I did not say a probable one. But you do not yourself look upon thisas likely?"
"I do not think Flora would hurt a fly."
"Still, jealousy is a strange transformer of characters. Pray what isyour own theory as to what took place?"
"Well, really, I came to seek a theory, not to propound one. I havegiven you all the facts. Since you ask me, however, I may say that ithas occurred to me as possible that the excitement of this affair, theconsciousness that she had made so immense a social stride, had theeffect of causing some little nervous disturbance in my wife."
"In short, that she had become suddenly deranged?"
"Well, really, when I consider that she has turned her back—I will notsay upon me, but upon so much that many have aspired to withoutsuccess—I can hardly explain it in any other fashion."
"Well, certainly that is also a conceivable hypothesis,"
"And now, Lord St. Simon, I think that I have nearly all mydata. May I ask whether you were seated at the breakfast-table so thatyou could see out of the window?"
"We could see the other side of the road and the Park."
"Quite so. Then I do not think that I need to detain you longer. Ishall communicate with you."
"Should you be fortunate enough to solve this problem,"
"I have solved it."
"Eh? What was that?"
"I say that I have solved it."
"Where, then, is my wife?"
"That is a detail which I shall speedily supply."
"I am afraid that it will take wiserheads than yours or mine,"
"It is very good of Lord St. Simon to honour my head by putting it on alevel with his own,"
"I think that Ishall have a whisky and soda and a cigar after all thiscross-questioning. I had formed my conclusions as to the case beforeour client came into the room."
"My dear Holmes!"
"I have notes of several similar cases, though none, as I remarkedbefore, which were quite as prompt. My whole examination served to turnmy conjecture into a certainty. Circumstantial evidence is occasionallyvery convincing, as when you find a trout in the milk, to quoteThoreau’s example."
"But I have heard all that you have heard."
"Without, however, the knowledge of pre-existing cases which serves meso well. There was a parallel instance in Aberdeen some years back, andsomething on very much the same lines at Munich the year after theFranco-Prussian War. It is one of these cases—but, hullo, here isLestrade! Good-afternoon, Lestrade! You will find an extra tumbler uponthe sideboard, and there are cigars in the box."
"What’s up, then?"
"You lookdissatisfied."
"And I feel dissatisfied. It is this infernal St. Simon marriage case.I can make neither head nor tail of the business."
"Really! You surprise me."
"Who ever heard of such a mixed affair? Every clue seems to slipthrough my fingers. I have been at work upon it all day."
"And very wet it seems to have made you,"
"Yes, I have been dragging the Serpentine."
"In Heaven’s name, what for?"
"In search of the body of Lady St. Simon."
"Have you dragged the basin of Trafalgar Square fountain?"
"Why? What do you mean?"
"Because you have just as good a chance of finding this lady in the oneas in the other."
"I suppose you know allabout it,"
"Well, I have only just heard the facts, but my mind is made up."
"Oh, indeed! Then you think that the Serpentine plays no part in thematter?"
"I think it very unlikely."
"Then perhaps you will kindly explain how it is that we found this init?"
"There,"
"There isa little nut for you to crack, Master Holmes."
"Oh, indeed!"
"Youdragged them from the Serpentine?"
"No. They were found floating near the margin by a park-keeper. Theyhave been identified as her clothes, and it seemed to me that if theclothes were there the body would not be far off."
"By the same brilliant reasoning, every man’s body is to be found inthe neighbourhood of his wardrobe. And pray what did you hope to arriveat through this?"
"At some evidence implicating Flora Millar in the disappearance."
"I am afraid that you will find it difficult."
"Are you, indeed, now?"
"I amafraid, Holmes, that you are not very practical with your deductionsand your inferences. You have made two blunders in as many minutes.This dress does implicate Miss Flora Millar."
"And how?"
"In the dress is a pocket. In the pocket is a card-case. In thecard-case is a note. And here is the very note."
"Listen to this: ‘You will see me whenall is ready. Come at once. F. H. M.’ Now my theory all along has beenthat Lady St. Simon was decoyed away by Flora Millar, and that she,with confederates, no doubt, was responsible for her disappearance.Here, signed with her initials, is the very note which was no doubtquietly slipped into her hand at the door and which lured her withintheir reach."
"Very good, Lestrade,"
"You really are very fineindeed. Let me see it."
"This is indeed important,"
"Ha! you find it so?"
"Extremely so. I congratulate you warmly."
"Why,"
"you’re looking at the wrong side!"
"On the contrary, this is the right side."
"The right side? You’re mad! Here is the note written in pencil overhere."
"And over here is what appears to be the fragment of a hotel bill,which interests me deeply."
"There’s nothing in it. I looked at it before,"
"‘Oct.4th, rooms 8_s_., breakfast 2_s_. 6_d_., cocktail 1_s_., lunch 2_s_.6_d_., glass sherry, 8_d_.’ I see nothing in that."
"Very likely not. It is most important, all the same. As to the note,it is important also, or at least the initials are, so I congratulateyou again."
"I’ve wasted time enough,"
"I believe in hardwork and not in sitting by the fire spinning fine theories. Good-day,Mr. Holmes, and we shall see which gets to the bottom of the matterfirst."
"Just one hint to you, Lestrade,"
"I will tell you the true solution of the matter. Lady St.Simon is a myth. There is not, and there never has been, any suchperson."
"There is something in what the fellow says about outdoorwork,"
"so I think, Watson, that I must leave you to yourpapers for a little."
"They have laid the supper, then,"
"You seem to expect company. They have laid for five."
"Yes, I fancy we may have some company dropping in,"
"I amsurprised that Lord St. Simon has not already arrived. Ha! I fancy thatI hear his step now upon the stairs."
"My messenger reached you, then?"
"Yes, and I confess that the contents startled me beyond measure. Haveyou good authority for what you say?"
"The best possible."
"What will the Duke say,"
"when he hears that one of thefamily has been subjected to such humiliation?"
"It is the purest accident. I cannot allow that there is anyhumiliation."
"Ah, you look on these things from another standpoint."
"I fail to see that anyone is to blame. I can hardly see how the ladycould have acted otherwise, though her abrupt method of doing it wasundoubtedly to be regretted. Having no mother, she had no one to adviseher at such a crisis."
"It was a slight, sir, a public slight,"
"You must make allowance for this poor girl, placed in so unprecedenteda position."
"I will make no allowance. I am very angry indeed, and I have beenshamefully used."
"I think that I heard a ring,"
"Yes, there are steps onthe landing. If I cannot persuade you to take a lenient view of thematter, Lord St. Simon, I have brought an advocate here who may be moresuccessful."
"Lord St. Simon,"
"allow me to introduce you to Mr. and Mrs.Francis Hay Moulton. The lady, I think, you have already met."
"You’re angry, Robert,"
"Well, I guess you have every causeto be."
"Pray make no apology to me,"
"Oh, yes, I know that I have treated you real bad and that I shouldhave spoken to you before I went; but I was kind of rattled, and fromthe time when I saw Frank here again I just didn’t know what I wasdoing or saying. I only wonder I didn’t fall down and do a faint rightthere before the altar."
"Perhaps, Mrs. Moulton, you would like my friend and me to leave theroom while you explain this matter?"
"If I may give an opinion,"
"we’ve hadjust a little too much secrecy over this business already. For my part,I should like all Europe and America to hear the rights of it."
"Then I’ll tell our story right away,"
"When I got back I told my maid, who had known him in California, andhad always been his friend. I ordered her to say nothing, but to get afew things packed and my ulster ready. I know I ought to have spoken toLord St. Simon, but it was dreadful hard before his mother and allthose great people. I just made up my mind to run away and explainafterwards. I hadn’t been at the table ten minutes before I saw Frankout of the window at the other side of the road. He beckoned to me andthen began walking into the Park. I slipped out, put on my things, andfollowed him. Some woman came talking something or other about Lord St.Simon to me—seemed to me from the little I heard as if he had a littlesecret of his own before marriage also—but I managed to get away fromher and soon overtook Frank. We got into a cab together, and away wedrove to some lodgings he had taken in Gordon Square, and that was mytrue wedding after all those years of waiting. Frank had been aprisoner among the Apaches, had escaped, came on to ’Frisco, found thatI had given him up for dead and had gone to England, followed me there,and had come upon me at last on the very morning of my second wedding."
"I saw it in a paper,"
"It gave the name andthe church but not where the lady lived."
"Then we had a talk as to what we should do, and Frank was all foropenness, but I was so ashamed of it all that I felt as if I shouldlike to vanish away and never see any of them again—just sending a lineto Pa, perhaps, to show him that I was alive. It was awful to me tothink of all those lords and ladies sitting round that breakfast-tableand waiting for me to come back. So Frank took my wedding-clothes andthings and made a bundle of them, so that I should not be traced, anddropped them away somewhere where no one could find them. It is likelythat we should have gone on to Paris to-morrow, only that this goodgentleman, Mr. Holmes, came round to us this evening, though how hefound us is more than I can think, and he showed us very clearly andkindly that I was wrong and that Frank was right, and that we should beputting ourselves in the wrong if we were so secret. Then he offered togive us a chance of talking to Lord St. Simon alone, and so we cameright away round to his rooms at once. Now, Robert, you have heard itall, and I am very sorry if I have given you pain, and I hope that youdo not think very meanly of me."
"Excuse me,"
"but it is not my custom to discuss my mostintimate personal affairs in this public manner."
"Then you won’t forgive me? You won’t shake hands before I go?"
"Oh, certainly, if it would give you any pleasure."
"I had hoped,"
"that you would have joined us in afriendly supper."
"I think that there you ask a little too much,"
"I may be forced to acquiesce in these recent developments, but I canhardly be expected to make merry over them. I think that with yourpermission I will now wish you all a very good-night."
"Then I trust that you at least will honour me with your company,"
"It is always a joy to meet an American, Mr. Moulton,for I am one of those who believe that the folly of a monarch and theblundering of a minister in far-gone years will not prevent ourchildren from being some day citizens of the same world-wide countryunder a flag which shall be a quartering of the Union Jack with theStars and Stripes."
"The case has been an interesting one,"
"because it serves to show very clearly howsimple the explanation may be of an affair which at first sight seemsto be almost inexplicable. Nothing could be more natural than thesequence of events as narrated by this lady, and nothing stranger thanthe result when viewed, for instance, by Mr. Lestrade of ScotlandYard."
"You were not yourself at fault at all, then?"
"From the first, two facts were very obvious to me, the one that thelady had been quite willing to undergo the wedding ceremony, the otherthat she had repented of it within a few minutes of returning home.Obviously something had occurred during the morning, then, to cause herto change her mind. What could that something be? She could not havespoken to anyone when she was out, for she had been in the company ofthe bridegroom. Had she seen someone, then? If she had, it must besomeone from America because she had spent so short a time in thiscountry that she could hardly have allowed anyone to acquire so deep aninfluence over her that the mere sight of him would induce her tochange her plans so completely. You see we have already arrived, by aprocess of exclusion, at the idea that she might have seen an American.Then who could this American be, and why should he possess so muchinfluence over her? It might be a lover; it might be a husband. Heryoung womanhood had, I knew, been spent in rough scenes and understrange conditions. So far I had got before I ever heard Lord St.Simon’s narrative. When he told us of a man in a pew, of the change inthe bride’s manner, of so transparent a device for obtaining a note asthe dropping of a bouquet, of her resort to her confidential maid, andof her very significant allusion to claim-jumping—which in miners’parlance means taking possession of that which another person has aprior claim to—the whole situation became absolutely clear. She hadgone off with a man, and the man was either a lover or was a previoushusband—the chances being in favour of the latter."
"And how in the world did you find them?"
"It might have been difficult, but friend Lestrade held information inhis hands the value of which he did not himself know. The initialswere, of course, of the highest importance, but more valuable still wasit to know that within a week he had settled his bill at one of themost select London hotels."
"How did you deduce the select?"
"By the select prices. Eight shillings for a bed and eightpence for aglass of sherry pointed to one of the most expensive hotels. There arenot many in London which charge at that rate. In the second one which Ivisited in Northumberland Avenue, I learned by an inspection of thebook that Francis H. Moulton, an American gentleman, had left only theday before, and on looking over the entries against him, I came uponthe very items which I had seen in the duplicate bill. His letters wereto be forwarded to 226 Gordon Square; so thither I travelled, and beingfortunate enough to find the loving couple at home, I ventured to givethem some paternal advice and to point out to them that it would bebetter in every way that they should make their position a littleclearer both to the general public and to Lord St. Simon in particular.I invited them to meet him here, and, as you see, I made him keep theappointment."
"But with no very good result,"
"His conduct was certainlynot very gracious."
"Ah, Watson,"
"perhaps you would not be verygracious either, if, after all the trouble of wooing and wedding, youfound yourself deprived in an instant of wife and of fortune. I thinkthat we may judge Lord St. Simon very mercifully and thank our starsthat we are never likely to find ourselves in the same position. Drawyour chair up and hand me my violin, for the only problem we have stillto solve is how to while away these bleak autumnal evenings."
"Holmes,"
"here is a madman coming along. It seems rather sad thathis relatives should allow him to come out alone."
"What on earth can be the matter with him?"
"He is looking upat the numbers of the houses."
"I believe that he is coming here,"
"Here?"
"Yes; I rather think he is coming to consult me professionally. I thinkthat I recognise the symptoms. Ha! did I not tell you?"
"You have come to me to tell your story, have you not?"
"Youare fatigued with your haste. Pray wait until you have recoveredyourself, and then I shall be most happy to look into any littleproblem which you may submit to me."
"No doubt you think me mad?"
"I see that you have had some great trouble,"
"God knows I have!—a trouble which is enough to unseat my reason, sosudden and so terrible is it. Public disgrace I might have faced,although I am a man whose character has never yet borne a stain.Private affliction also is the lot of every man; but the two comingtogether, and in so frightful a form, have been enough to shake my verysoul. Besides, it is not I alone. The very noblest in the land maysuffer unless some way be found out of this horrible affair."
"Pray compose yourself, sir,"
"and let me have a clearaccount of who you are and what it is that has befallen you."
"My name,"
"is probably familiar to your ears. Iam Alexander Holder, of the banking firm of Holder & Stevenson, ofThreadneedle Street."
"I feel that time is of value,"
"I am endeavouring to tell you everything, Mr. Holmes, which may haveany bearing upon the case, but I beg that you will question me upon anypoint which I do not make clear."
"On the contrary, your statement is singularly lucid."
"‘Keep your forgiveness for those who ask for it,’ he answered, turningaway from me with a sneer. I saw that he was too hardened for any wordsof mine to influence him. There was but one way for it. I called in theinspector and gave him into custody. A search was made at once not onlyof his person but of his room and of every portion of the house wherehe could possibly have concealed the gems; but no trace of them couldbe found, nor would the wretched boy open his mouth for all ourpersuasions and our threats. This morning he was removed to a cell, andI, after going through all the police formalities, have hurried roundto you to implore you to use your skill in unravelling the matter. Thepolice have openly confessed that they can at present make nothing ofit. You may go to any expense which you think necessary. I have alreadyoffered a reward of £ 1000. My God, what shall I do! I have lost myhonour, my gems, and my son in one night. Oh, what shall I do!"
"Do you receive much company?"
"None save my partner with his family and an occasional friend ofArthur’s. Sir George Burnwell has been several times lately. No oneelse, I think."
"Do you go out much in society?"
"Arthur does. Mary and I stay at home. We neither of us care for it."
"That is unusual in a young girl."
"She is of a quiet nature. Besides, she is not so very young. She isfour-and-twenty."
"This matter, from what you say, seems to have been a shock to heralso."
"Terrible! She is even more affected than I."
"You have neither of you any doubt as to your son’s guilt?"
"How can we have when I saw him with my own eyes with the coronet inhis hands."
"I hardly consider that a conclusive proof. Was the remainder of thecoronet at all injured?"
"Yes, it was twisted."
"Do you not think, then, that he might have been trying to straightenit?"
"God bless you! You are doing what you can for him and for me. But itis too heavy a task. What was he doing there at all? If his purposewere innocent, why did he not say so?"
"Precisely. And if it were guilty, why did he not invent a lie? Hissilence appears to me to cut both ways. There are several singularpoints about the case. What did the police think of the noise whichawoke you from your sleep?"
"They considered that it might be caused by Arthur’s closing hisbedroom door."
"A likely story! As if a man bent on felony would slam his door so asto wake a household. What did they say, then, of the disappearance ofthese gems?"
"They are still sounding the planking and probing the furniture in thehope of finding them."
"Have they thought of looking outside the house?"
"Yes, they have shown extraordinary energy. The whole garden hasalready been minutely examined."
"Now, my dear sir,"
"is it not obvious to you now thatthis matter really strikes very much deeper than either you or thepolice were at first inclined to think? It appeared to you to be asimple case; to me it seems exceedingly complex. Consider what isinvolved by your theory. You suppose that your son came down from hisbed, went, at great risk, to your dressing-room, opened your bureau,took out your coronet, broke off by main force a small portion of it,went off to some other place, concealed three gems out of thethirty-nine, with such skill that nobody can find them, and thenreturned with the other thirty-six into the room in which he exposedhimself to the greatest danger of being discovered. I ask you now, issuch a theory tenable?"
"But what other is there?"
"If his motives were innocent, why does he not explain them?"
"It is our task to find that out,"
"so now, if youplease, Mr. Holder, we will set off for Streatham together, and devotean hour to glancing a little more closely into details."
"You have given orders that Arthur should be liberated, have you not,dad?"
"No, no, my girl, the matter must be probed to the bottom."
"But I am so sure that he is innocent. You know what woman’s instinctsare. I know that he has done no harm and that you will be sorry forhaving acted so harshly."
"Why is he silent, then, if he is innocent?"
"Who knows? Perhaps because he was so angry that you should suspecthim."
"How could I help suspecting him, when I actually saw him with thecoronet in his hand?"
"Oh, but he had only picked it up to look at it. Oh, do, do take myword for it that he is innocent. Let the matter drop and say no more.It is so dreadful to think of our dear Arthur in prison!"
"I shall never let it drop until the gems are found—never, Mary! Youraffection for Arthur blinds you as to the awful consequences to me. Farfrom hushing the thing up, I have brought a gentleman down from Londonto inquire more deeply into it."
"This gentleman?"
"No, his friend. He wished us to leave him alone. He is round in thestable lane now."
"The stable lane?"
"What can he hope tofind there? Ah! this, I suppose, is he. I trust, sir, that you willsucceed in proving, what I feel sure is the truth, that my cousinArthur is innocent of this crime."
"I fully share your opinion, and I trust, with you, that we may proveit,"
"I believe I have the honour of addressing Miss Mary Holder.Might I ask you a question or two?"
"Pray do, sir, if it may help to clear this horrible affair up."
"You heard nothing yourself last night?"
"Nothing, until my uncle here began to speak loudly. I heard that, andI came down."
"You shut up the windows and doors the night before. Did you fasten allthe windows?"
"Yes."
"Were they all fastened this morning?"
"Yes."
"You have a maid who has a sweetheart? I think that you remarked toyour uncle last night that she had been out to see him?"
"Yes, and she was the girl who waited in the drawing-room, and who mayhave heard uncle’s remarks about the coronet."
"I see. You infer that she may have gone out to tell her sweetheart,and that the two may have planned the robbery."
"But what is the good of all these vague theories,"
"when I have told you that I saw Arthur with the coronetin his hands?"
"Wait a little, Mr. Holder. We must come back to that. About this girl,Miss Holder. You saw her return by the kitchen door, I presume?"
"Yes; when I went to see if the door was fastened for the night I mether slipping in. I saw the man, too, in the gloom."
"Do you know him?"
"Oh, yes! he is the greengrocer who brings our vegetables round. Hisname is Francis Prosper."
"He stood,"
"to the left of the door—that is to say,farther up the path than is necessary to reach the door?"
"Yes, he did."
"And he is a man with a wooden leg?"
"Why, you are like a magician,"
"How do you know that?"
"I should be very glad now to go upstairs,"
"I shall probablywish to go over the outside of the house again. Perhaps I had bettertake a look at the lower windows before I go up."
"Now we shall go upstairs,"
"Which key was used to open it?"
"That which my son himself indicated—that of the cupboard of thelumber-room."
"Have you it here?"
"That is it on the dressing-table."
"It is a noiseless lock,"
"It is no wonder that it did notwake you. This case, I presume, contains the coronet. We must have alook at it."
"Now, Mr. Holder,"
"here is the corner which correspondsto that which has been so unfortunately lost. Might I beg that you willbreak it off."
"I should not dream of trying,"
"Then I will."
"I feel it give a little,"
"but, though I amexceptionally strong in the fingers, it would take me all my time tobreak it. An ordinary man could not do it. Now, what do you think wouldhappen if I did break it, Mr. Holder? There would be a noise like apistol shot. Do you tell me that all this happened within a few yardsof your bed and that you heard nothing of it?"
"I do not know what to think. It is all dark to me."
"But perhaps it may grow lighter as we go. What do you think, MissHolder?"
"I confess that I still share my uncle’s perplexity."
"Your son had no shoes or slippers on when you saw him?"
"He had nothing on save only his trousers and shirt."
"Thank you. We have certainly been favoured with extraordinary luckduring this inquiry, and it will be entirely our own fault if we do notsucceed in clearing the matter up. With your permission, Mr. Holder, Ishall now continue my investigations outside."
"I think that I have seen now all that there is to see, Mr. Holder,"
"I can serve you best by returning to my rooms."
"But the gems, Mr. Holmes. Where are they?"
"I cannot tell."
"I shall never see them again!"
"And my son? You give me hopes?"
"My opinion is in no way altered."
"Then, for God’s sake, what was this dark business which was acted inmy house last night?"
"If you can call upon me at my Baker Street rooms to-morrow morningbetween nine and ten I shall be happy to do what I can to make itclearer. I understand that you give me _carte blanche_ to act for you,provided only that I get back the gems, and that you place no limit onthe sum I may draw."
"I would give my fortune to have them back."
"Very good. I shall look into the matter between this and then.Good-bye; it is just possible that I may have to come over here againbefore evening."
"I think that this should do,"
"I only wish that you could come with me, Watson, but Ifear that it won’t do. I may be on the trail in this matter, or I maybe following a will-o’-the-wisp, but I shall soon know which it is. Ihope that I may be back in a few hours."
"I only looked in as I passed,"
"I am going right on."
"Where to?"
"Oh, to the other side of the West End. It may be some time before Iget back. Don’t wait up for me in case I should be late."
"How are you getting on?"
"Oh, so so. Nothing to complain of. I have been out to Streatham sinceI saw you last, but I did not call at the house. It is a very sweetlittle problem, and I would not have missed it for a good deal.However, I must not sit gossiping here, but must get these disreputableclothes off and return to my highly respectable self."
"You will excuse my beginning without you, Watson,"
"but youremember that our client has rather an early appointment this morning."
"Why, it is after nine now,"
"I should not be surprised ifthat were he. I thought I heard a ring."
"I do not know what I have done to be so severely tried,"
"Only two days ago I was a happy and prosperous man, without a care inthe world. Now I am left to a lonely and dishonoured age. One sorrowcomes close upon the heels of another. My niece, Mary, has desertedme."
"Deserted you?"
"What could she mean by that note, Mr. Holmes? Do you think it pointsto suicide?"
"No, no, nothing of the kind. It is perhaps the best possible solution.I trust, Mr. Holder, that you are nearing the end of your troubles."
"Ha! You say so! You have heard something, Mr. Holmes; you have learnedsomething! Where are the gems?"
"You would not think £ 1000 apiece an excessive sum for them?"
"I would pay ten."
"That would be unnecessary. Three thousand will cover the matter. Andthere is a little reward, I fancy. Have you your cheque-book? Here is apen. Better make it out for £ 4000."
"You have it!"
"I am saved! I am saved!"
"There is one other thing you owe, Mr. Holder,"
"Owe!"
"Name the sum, and I will pay it."
"No, the debt is not to me. You owe a very humble apology to that noblelad, your son, who has carried himself in this matter as I should beproud to see my own son do, should I ever chance to have one."
"Then it was not Arthur who took them?"
"I told you yesterday, and I repeat to-day, that it was not."
"You are sure of it! Then let us hurry to him at once to let him knowthat the truth is known."
"He knows it already. When I had cleared it all up I had an interviewwith him, and finding that he would not tell me the story, I told it tohim, on which he had to confess that I was right and to add the veryfew details which were not yet quite clear to me. Your news of thismorning, however, may open his lips."
"For Heaven’s sake, tell me, then, what is this extraordinary mystery!"
"I will do so, and I will show you the steps by which I reached it. Andlet me say to you, first, that which it is hardest for me to say andfor you to hear: there has been an understanding between Sir GeorgeBurnwell and your niece Mary. They have now fled together."
"My Mary? Impossible!"
"It is unfortunately more than possible; it is certain. Neither you noryour son knew the true character of this man when you admitted him intoyour family circle. He is one of the most dangerous men in England—aruined gambler, an absolutely desperate villain, a man without heart orconscience. Your niece knew nothing of such men. When he breathed hisvows to her, as he had done to a hundred before her, she flatteredherself that she alone had touched his heart. The devil knows best whathe said, but at least she became his tool and was in the habit ofseeing him nearly every evening."
"I cannot, and I will not, believe it!"
"As long as she was on the scene he could not take any action without ahorrible exposure of the woman whom he loved. But the instant that shewas gone he realised how crushing a misfortune this would be for you,and how all-important it was to set it right. He rushed down, just ashe was, in his bare feet, opened the window, sprang out into the snow,and ran down the lane, where he could see a dark figure in themoonlight. Sir George Burnwell tried to get away, but Arthur caughthim, and there was a struggle between them, your lad tugging at oneside of the coronet, and his opponent at the other. In the scuffle,your son struck Sir George and cut him over the eye. Then somethingsuddenly snapped, and your son, finding that he had the coronet in hishands, rushed back, closed the window, ascended to your room, and hadjust observed that the coronet had been twisted in the struggle and wasendeavouring to straighten it when you appeared upon the scene."
"Is it possible?"
"You then roused his anger by calling him names at a moment when hefelt that he had deserved your warmest thanks. He could not explain thetrue state of affairs without betraying one who certainly deservedlittle enough consideration at his hands. He took the more chivalrousview, however, and preserved her secret."
"And that was why she shrieked and fainted when she saw the coronet,"
"Oh, my God! what a blind fool I have been! And hisasking to be allowed to go out for five minutes! The dear fellow wantedto see if the missing piece were at the scene of the struggle. Howcruelly I have misjudged him!"
"When I arrived at the house,"
"Well, your own good sense will suggest what measures I took next. Iwent in the shape of a loafer to Sir George’s house, managed to pick upan acquaintance with his valet, learned that his master had cut hishead the night before, and, finally, at the expense of six shillings,made all sure by buying a pair of his cast-off shoes. With these Ijourneyed down to Streatham and saw that they exactly fitted thetracks."
"I saw an ill-dressed vagabond in the lane yesterday evening,"
"Precisely. It was I. I found that I had my man, so I came home andchanged my clothes. It was a delicate part which I had to play then,for I saw that a prosecution must be avoided to avert scandal, and Iknew that so astute a villain would see that our hands were tied in thematter. I went and saw him. At first, of course, he denied everything.But when I gave him every particular that had occurred, he tried tobluster and took down a life-preserver from the wall. I knew my man,however, and I clapped a pistol to his head before he could strike.Then he became a little more reasonable. I told him that we would givehim a price for the stones he held—£ 1000 apiece. That brought out thefirst signs of grief that he had shown. ‘Why, dash it all!’ said he,‘I’ve let them go at six hundred for the three!’ I soon managed to getthe address of the receiver who had them, on promising him that therewould be no prosecution. Off I set to him, and after much chaffering Igot our stones at £ 1000 apiece. Then I looked in upon your son, toldhim that all was right, and eventually got to my bed about two o’clock,after what I may call a really hard day’s work."
"A day which has saved England from a great public scandal,"
"Sir, I cannot find words to thank you, but you shallnot find me ungrateful for what you have done. Your skill has indeedexceeded all that I have heard of it. And now I must fly to my dear boyto apologise to him for the wrong which I have done him. As to what youtell me of poor Mary, it goes to my very heart. Not even your skill caninform me where she is now."
"I think that we may safely say,"
"that she iswherever Sir George Burnwell is. It is equally certain, too, thatwhatever her sins are, they will soon receive a more than sufficientpunishment."
"To the man who loves art for its own sake,"
"it isfrequently in its least important and lowliest manifestations that thekeenest pleasure is to be derived. It is pleasant to me to observe,Watson, that you have so far grasped this truth that in these littlerecords of our cases which you have been good enough to draw up, and, Iam bound to say, occasionally to embellish, you have given prominencenot so much to the many _causes célèbres_ and sensational trials inwhich I have figured but rather to those incidents which may have beentrivial in themselves, but which have given room for those faculties ofdeduction and of logical synthesis which I have made my specialprovince."
"And yet,"
"I cannot quite hold myself absolved fromthe charge of sensationalism which has been urged against my records."
"You have erred, perhaps,"
"you have erred perhaps in attempting to put colour andlife into each of your statements instead of confining yourself to thetask of placing upon record that severe reasoning from cause to effectwhich is really the only notable feature about the thing."
"It seems to me that I have done you full justice in the matter,"
"No, it is not selfishness or conceit,"
"If I claim full justice for myart, it is because it is an impersonal thing—a thing beyond myself.Crime is common. Logic is rare. Therefore it is upon the logic ratherthan upon the crime that you should dwell. You have degraded whatshould have been a course of lectures into a series of tales."
"At the same time,"
"you can hardlybe open to a charge of sensationalism, for out of these cases which youhave been so kind as to interest yourself in, a fair proportion do nottreat of crime, in its legal sense, at all. The small matter in which Iendeavoured to help the King of Bohemia, the singular experience ofMiss Mary Sutherland, the problem connected with the man with thetwisted lip, and the incident of the noble bachelor, were all matterswhich are outside the pale of the law. But in avoiding the sensational,I fear that you may have bordered on the trivial."
"The end may have been so,"
"but the methods I hold to havebeen novel and of interest."
"Pshaw, my dear fellow, what do the public, the great unobservantpublic, who could hardly tell a weaver by his tooth or a compositor byhis left thumb, care about the finer shades of analysis and deduction!But, indeed, if you are trivial, I cannot blame you, for the days ofthe great cases are past. Man, or at least criminal man, has lost allenterprise and originality. As to my own little practice, it seems tobe degenerating into an agency for recovering lost lead pencils andgiving advice to young ladies from boarding-schools. I think that Ihave touched bottom at last, however. This note I had this morningmarks my zero-point, I fancy. Read it!"
"VIOLET HUNTER."
"Do you know the young lady?"
"Not I."
"It is half-past ten now."
"Yes, and I have no doubt that is her ring."
"It may turn out to be of more interest than you think. You rememberthat the affair of the blue carbuncle, which appeared to be a mere whimat first, developed into a serious investigation. It may be so in thiscase, also."
"Well, let us hope so. But our doubts will very soon be solved, forhere, unless I am much mistaken, is the person in question."
"You will excuse my troubling you, I am sure,"
"but I have had a very strange experience,and as I have no parents or relations of any sort from whom I could askadvice, I thought that perhaps you would be kind enough to tell me whatI should do."
"Pray take a seat, Miss Hunter. I shall be happy to do anything that Ican to serve you."
"I have been a governess for five years,"
"That is the letter which I have just received, Mr. Holmes, and my mindis made up that I will accept it. I thought, however, that beforetaking the final step I should like to submit the whole matter to yourconsideration."
"Well, Miss Hunter, if your mind is made up, that settles thequestion,"
"But you would not advise me to refuse?"
"I confess that it is not the situation which I should like to see asister of mine apply for."
"What is the meaning of it all, Mr. Holmes?"
"Ah, I have no data. I cannot tell. Perhaps you have yourself formedsome opinion?"
"Well, there seems to me to be only one possible solution. Mr. Rucastleseemed to be a very kind, good-natured man. Is it not possible that hiswife is a lunatic, that he desires to keep the matter quiet for fearshe should be taken to an asylum, and that he humours her fancies inevery way in order to prevent an outbreak?"
"That is a possible solution—in fact, as matters stand, it is the mostprobable one. But in any case it does not seem to be a nice householdfor a young lady."
"But the money, Mr. Holmes, the money!"
"Well, yes, of course the pay is good—too good. That is what makes meuneasy. Why should they give you £ 120 a year, when they could havetheir pick for £ 40? There must be some strong reason behind."
"I thought that if I told you the circumstances you would understandafterwards if I wanted your help. I should feel so much stronger if Ifelt that you were at the back of me."
"Oh, you may carry that feeling away with you. I assure you that yourlittle problem promises to be the most interesting which has come myway for some months. There is something distinctly novel about some ofthe features. If you should find yourself in doubt or in danger—"
"Danger! What danger do you foresee?"
"It would cease to be a danger if wecould define it,"
"But at any time, day or night, a telegramwould bring me down to your help."
"That is enough."
"I shall go down to Hampshire quite easy in mymind now. I shall write to Mr. Rucastle at once, sacrifice my poor hairto-night, and start for Winchester to-morrow."
"At least,"
"she seems to be a young lady who is very well able to takecare of herself."
"And she would need to be,"
"I am much mistaken ifwe do not hear from her before many days are past."
"Data! data!data!"
"I can’t make bricks without clay."
"Just look up the trains in Bradshaw,"
"Please be at the Black Swan Hotel at Winchester at midday to-morrow,"
"HUNTER."
"Will you come with me?"
"I should wish to."
"Just look it up, then."
"There is a train at half-past nine,"
"It is due at Winchester at 11:30."
"That will do very nicely. Then perhaps I had better postpone myanalysis of the acetones, as we may need to be at our best in themorning."
"Are they not fresh and beautiful?"
"Do you know, Watson,"
"that it is one of the curses of a mindwith a turn like mine that I must look at everything with reference tomy own special subject. You look at these scattered houses, and you areimpressed by their beauty. I look at them, and the only thought whichcomes to me is a feeling of their isolation and of the impunity withwhich crime may be committed there."
"Good heavens!"
"Who would associate crime with these dear oldhomesteads?"
"They always fill me with a certain horror. It is my belief, Watson,founded upon my experience, that the lowest and vilest alleys in Londondo not present a more dreadful record of sin than does the smiling andbeautiful countryside."
"You horrify me!"
"But the reason is very obvious. The pressure of public opinion can doin the town what the law cannot accomplish. There is no lane so vilethat the scream of a tortured child, or the thud of a drunkard’s blow,does not beget sympathy and indignation among the neighbours, and thenthe whole machinery of justice is ever so close that a word ofcomplaint can set it going, and there is but a step between the crimeand the dock. But look at these lonely houses, each in its own fields,filled for the most part with poor ignorant folk who know little of thelaw. Think of the deeds of hellish cruelty, the hidden wickedness whichmay go on, year in, year out, in such places, and none the wiser. Hadthis lady who appeals to us for help gone to live in Winchester, Ishould never have had a fear for her. It is the five miles of countrywhich makes the danger. Still, it is clear that she is not personallythreatened."
"No. If she can come to Winchester to meet us she can get away."
"Quite so. She has her freedom."
"What _can_ be the matter, then? Can you suggest no explanation?"
"I have devised seven separate explanations, each of which would coverthe facts as far as we know them. But which of these is correct canonly be determined by the fresh information which we shall no doubtfind waiting for us. Well, there is the tower of the cathedral, and weshall soon learn all that Miss Hunter has to tell."
"I am so delighted that you have come,"
"It is sovery kind of you both; but indeed I do not know what I should do. Youradvice will be altogether invaluable to me."
"Pray tell us what has happened to you."
"I will do so, and I must be quick, for I have promised Mr. Rucastle tobe back before three. I got his leave to come into town this morning,though he little knew for what purpose."
"Let us have everything in its due order."
"In the first place, I may say that I have met, on the whole, with noactual ill-treatment from Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle. It is only fair tothem to say that. But I cannot understand them, and I am not easy in mymind about them."
"What can you not understand?"
"Mrs. Rucastle seemed to me to be colourless in mind as well as infeature. She impressed me neither favourably nor the reverse. She was anonentity. It was easy to see that she was passionately devoted both toher husband and to her little son. Her light grey eyes wanderedcontinually from one to the other, noting every little want andforestalling it if possible. He was kind to her also in his bluff,boisterous fashion, and on the whole they seemed to be a happy couple.And yet she had some secret sorrow, this woman. She would often be lostin deep thought, with the saddest look upon her face. More than once Ihave surprised her in tears. I have thought sometimes that it was thedisposition of her child which weighed upon her mind, for I have nevermet so utterly spoiled and so ill-natured a little creature. He issmall for his age, with a head which is quite disproportionately large.His whole life appears to be spent in an alternation between savagefits of passion and gloomy intervals of sulking. Giving pain to anycreature weaker than himself seems to be his one idea of amusement, andhe shows quite remarkable talent in planning the capture of mice,little birds, and insects. But I would rather not talk about thecreature, Mr. Holmes, and, indeed, he has little to do with my story."
"I am glad of all details,"
"whether they seem toyou to be relevant or not."
"I did as I was told, and at the same instant Mrs. Rucastle drew downthe blind. That was a week ago, and from that time I have not sat againin the window, nor have I worn the blue dress, nor seen the man in theroad."
"Pray continue,"
"Your narrative promises to be a mostinteresting one."
"I was so terrified that I do not know what I did. I suppose that Imust have rushed past him into my room. I remember nothing until Ifound myself lying on my bed trembling all over. Then I thought of you,Mr. Holmes. I could not live there longer without some advice. I wasfrightened of the house, of the man, of the woman, of the servants,even of the child. They were all horrible to me. If I could only bringyou down all would be well. Of course I might have fled from the house,but my curiosity was almost as strong as my fears. My mind was soonmade up. I would send you a wire. I put on my hat and cloak, went downto the office, which is about half a mile from the house, and thenreturned, feeling very much easier. A horrible doubt came into my mindas I approached the door lest the dog might be loose, but I rememberedthat Toller had drunk himself into a state of insensibility thatevening, and I knew that he was the only one in the household who hadany influence with the savage creature, or who would venture to set himfree. I slipped in in safety and lay awake half the night in my joy atthe thought of seeing you. I had no difficulty in getting leave to comeinto Winchester this morning, but I must be back before three o’clock,for Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle are going on a visit, and will be away allthe evening, so that I must look after the child. Now I have told youall my adventures, Mr. Holmes, and I should be very glad if you couldtell me what it all means, and, above all, what I should do."
"Is Toller still drunk?"
"Yes. I heard his wife tell Mrs. Rucastle that she could do nothingwith him."
"That is well. And the Rucastles go out to-night?"
"Yes."
"Is there a cellar with a good strong lock?"
"Yes, the wine-cellar."
"You seem to me to have acted all through this matter like a very braveand sensible girl, Miss Hunter. Do you think that you could perform onemore feat? I should not ask it of you if I did not think you a quiteexceptional woman."
"I will try. What is it?"
"We shall be at the Copper Beeches by seven o’clock, my friend and I.The Rucastles will be gone by that time, and Toller will, we hope, beincapable. There only remains Mrs. Toller, who might give the alarm. Ifyou could send her into the cellar on some errand, and then turn thekey upon her, you would facilitate matters immensely."
"I will do it."
"Excellent! We shall then look thoroughly into the affair. Of coursethere is only one feasible explanation. You have been brought there topersonate someone, and the real person is imprisoned in this chamber.That is obvious. As to who this prisoner is, I have no doubt that it isthe daughter, Miss Alice Rucastle, if I remember right, who was said tohave gone to America. You were chosen, doubtless, as resembling her inheight, figure, and the colour of your hair. Hers had been cut off,very possibly in some illness through which she has passed, and so, ofcourse, yours had to be sacrificed also. By a curious chance you cameupon her tresses. The man in the road was undoubtedly some friend ofhers—possibly her _fiancé_—and no doubt, as you wore the girl’s dressand were so like her, he was convinced from your laughter, whenever hesaw you, and afterwards from your gesture, that Miss Rucastle wasperfectly happy, and that she no longer desired his attentions. The dogis let loose at night to prevent him from endeavouring to communicatewith her. So much is fairly clear. The most serious point in the caseis the disposition of the child."
"What on earth has that to do with it?"
"My dear Watson, you as a medical man are continually gaining light asto the tendencies of a child by the study of the parents. Don’t you seethat the converse is equally valid. I have frequently gained my firstreal insight into the character of parents by studying their children.This child’s disposition is abnormally cruel, merely for cruelty’ssake, and whether he derives this from his smiling father, as I shouldsuspect, or from his mother, it bodes evil for the poor girl who is intheir power."
"I am sure that you are right, Mr. Holmes,"
"Athousand things come back to me which make me certain that you have hitit. Oh, let us lose not an instant in bringing help to this poorcreature."
"We must be circumspect, for we are dealing with a very cunning man. Wecan do nothing until seven o’clock. At that hour we shall be with you,and it will not be long before we solve the mystery."
"Have you managed it?"
"That is Mrs.Toller in the cellar,"
"Her husband lies snoring on thekitchen rug. Here are his keys, which are the duplicates of Mr.Rucastle’s."
"You have done well indeed!"
"Now leadthe way, and we shall soon see the end of this black business."
"I trust that we are not too late,"
"I think, Miss Hunter,that we had better go in without you. Now, Watson, put your shoulder toit, and we shall see whether we cannot make our way in."
"There has been some villainy here,"
"this beauty hasguessed Miss Hunter’s intentions and has carried his victim off."
"But how?"
"Through the skylight. We shall soon see how he managed it."
"Ah, yes,"
"here’s the end of along light ladder against the eaves. That is how he did it."
"But it is impossible,"
"the ladder was not therewhen the Rucastles went away."
"He has come back and done it. I tell you that he is a clever anddangerous man. I should not be very much surprised if this were hewhose step I hear now upon the stair. I think, Watson, that it would beas well for you to have your pistol ready."
"You villain!"
"where’s your daughter?"
"It is for me to ask you that,"
"you thieves! Spies andthieves! I have caught you, have I? You are in my power. I’ll serveyou!"
"He’s gone for the dog!"
"I have my revolver,"
"Better close the front door,"
"My God!"
"Someone has loosed the dog. It’s not been fed fortwo days. Quick, quick, or it’ll be too late!"
"Mrs. Toller!"
"Yes, miss. Mr. Rucastle let me out when he came back before he went upto you. Ah, miss, it is a pity you didn’t let me know what you wereplanning, for I would have told you that your pains were wasted."
"Ha!"
"It is clear that Mrs. Tollerknows more about this matter than anyone else."
"Yes, sir, I do, and I am ready enough to tell what I know."
"Then, pray, sit down, and let us hear it for there are several pointson which I must confess that I am still in the dark."
"I will soon make it clear to you,"
"She was never happy at home, Miss Alice wasn’t, from the time that herfather married again. She was slighted like and had no say in anything,but it never really became bad for her until after she met Mr. Fowlerat a friend’s house. As well as I could learn, Miss Alice had rights ofher own by will, but she was so quiet and patient, she was, that shenever said a word about them but just left everything in Mr. Rucastle’shands. He knew he was safe with her; but when there was a chance of ahusband coming forward, who would ask for all that the law would givehim, then her father thought it time to put a stop on it. He wanted herto sign a paper, so that whether she married or not, he could use hermoney. When she wouldn’t do it, he kept on worrying her until she gotbrain-fever, and for six weeks was at death’s door. Then she got betterat last, all worn to a shadow, and with her beautiful hair cut off; butthat didn’t make no change in her young man, and he stuck to her astrue as man could be."
"Ah,"
"I think that what you have been good enough to tellus makes the matter fairly clear, and that I can deduce all thatremains. Mr. Rucastle then, I presume, took to this system ofimprisonment?"
"Yes, sir."
"And brought Miss Hunter down from London in order to get rid of thedisagreeable persistence of Mr. Fowler."
"That was it, sir."
"But Mr. Fowler being a persevering man, as a good seaman should be,blockaded the house, and having met you succeeded by certain arguments,metallic or otherwise, in convincing you that your interests were thesame as his."
"Mr. Fowler was a very kind-spoken, free-handed gentleman,"
"And in this way he managed that your good man should have no want ofdrink, and that a ladder should be ready at the moment when your masterhad gone out."
"You have it, sir, just as it happened."
"I am sure we owe you an apology, Mrs. Toller,"
"for youhave certainly cleared up everything which puzzled us. And here comesthe country surgeon and Mrs. Rucastle, so I think, Watson, that we hadbest escort Miss Hunter back to Winchester, as it seems to me that our_locus standi_ now is rather a questionable one."
"ProjectGutenberg"
"Project Gutenberg"
"theFoundation"
"Project Gutenberg"
"Project Gutenberg"
"ProjectGutenberg"
"Plain Vanilla ASCII"
"PlainVanilla ASCII"
"Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg  Literary Archive Foundation."
"Defects,"
"Rightof Replacement or Refund"
